Big one.
Oh, no thanks. That's what I
Thank you.
Responsibility. My son calls
Smile. Everybody. Could
I cover your way?
Thank you.
Um,
Welcome to everybody.
Thank you very much for coming for us.
We've got a, a little bit of time with you this morning,
as you can see by our structured agenda itself.
Um, and we will be doing our best to manage our, our, uh,
time within the, the, the brackets here.
And so, uh, the first part is about the transfer
of functions, um, the
otherwise known as now, um, over to,
um, but before we do that, minister, I'd ask perhaps
for some opening comments from you
before we, we get stuck into it.
So, uh,
Fast
Ministry of Maori Development Act 1991,
promoting the achievement of Maori cross health education
and employment training, economic development,
and holding the other agencies to account,
which comprises 99.5% of all the funding
that's distributed across different votes, uh,
for the adequacy of their services,
vis-a-vis Maori across those areas.
Health, education, economic developments,
and women in training.
Uh, so, uh, that's something
that I've really challenged Dave around
and the team that most of the vote,
99 point something percent across government
is through the mainstream agencies.
And our expectation, certainly my expectation
and what the government has endorsed is that the monitoring
and mentoring function, the has elevated
and at the core of the, uh, that Dave
and the team are undertaking
and to hold other agencies to account in.
Fortunately, we've got some fantastic, uh, teammates, uh,
like young here.
Hi, have you, yeah, yeah.
80, who's doing some marvelous work up on temporal
upcoming around monitoring.
So all those targets of that government has eight
of the nine key government targets.
Uh, they've been the subject of serious, uh, inquiry
and reporting and monitoring,
and also recommendations
how we can better deliver on those targets
vis-a-vis Maori populations.
So some of the results are actually quite surprising.
For example, um, Maori, uh,
are seeing emergency department, uh,
specialists faster than the rest
of the population who would've known.
Uh, but we actually have faster, uh,
engagement in emergency
department than the rest of the population.
But one of the reasons why, if you take that factoid
by itself, you think that's a good thing, but it's not
because we actually present with high triage issues.
Uh, and that's the problem.
And you, you roll that back to why is that the case?
Because of our access to GPS and others.
And I'm not saying that's the reason why I'm
so enthusiastic about medical school,
but it would be good to have more rural doctors
and health professionals.
Uh, and I know there's a bit of a protest on today up north.
Uh, you know, it really just, um,
it doesn't make me disappointed,
but it makes me disturbed that places like north of Kakoa
after four o'clock on Friday don't have doctors and nurses.
They got elder, you know?
Um, and, uh, WTA what the aha on that.
Uh, and hence why, uh, the mahi that I've really
encouraged Dave to focus on is monitor the bulk of the vote
and how if, and how other departments
and ministries, government agencies are delivering
on the adequacy of services.
Because if they're not, that has to be held up in lights
and say, how can we do this better?
Mm. And the team
and the data team, data monitoring team has been very
enthusiastic by my enthusiasm.
I hope to do that.
Anyway, that's, uh, where we're at
and happy to take, uh, direction
and questions from the chair, uh,
and focus on these, uh, sections.
One section out and we'll,
we'll kick straight off into this fee section,
and we'll go, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, sorry, I'll turn straight now to my question.
To, uh, uh, minister, you've spoken about the task
and ahead of about making sure that they're able
to measure the effectiveness of delivery for Maori across,
uh, the broader vote, uh, and budget.
Um, so with respect to Maori crown relations
and the transfer of those functions into
when can we expect a clear measurement matrix
that will allow us to see whether
or not there is value for money
and what has transpired with the transfer of those
Functions?
So, um, just a 32nd context.
Uh, essentially the mi crown relations, um, within
was lifted, shifted, and dropped into.
Uh, and one of the reasons, uh, for that,
or one of the drivers for that is it's very hard for me
to say hand on heart, the group
or the entity that's responsible
for driving a hard negotiation
around treaty settlements can then the next day
after treaty settlement aside saying,
we're gonna be your best friend
to help implement these settlement obligations,
I think is quite strange.
Uh, and whilst, uh, um, predecessors, uh, have said,
actually, that's where we're gonna go, agencies as we know,
have struggled to settlement commitments,
and that's born itself out in the recent report from
John Ryan, uh, the Office of the Attorney General.
Importantly though, we have, um, had the first whole
of system report against treaty settlement obligations,
the implementation of same, uh, in December last year.
Uh, and that was presented to cabinet
and carried through in the Ombudsman report.
For the most part, the shift, uh,
shift lifting shift in movement has been conducted in a very
diligent professional manner.
Uh, there has been a little bit of disruption along the way,
uh, but that is now integrated into the mahi that is led
by Secretary for minor development, uh, data and,
and delivered, I think in a, um, in a manner, uh,
that is enduring.
So now it a clear relationship lead vis-a-vis PSGs,
settle governing entities, uh,
and particularly around those settlement obligations,
but also the accords of which is leading nine
of 12 of those accords.
Uh, and one way we can measure the performance
of the crown against the Crown Maori relationship
responsibilities is through the numbers that come out of
treaty settlement obligations delivered on track yet
to be triggered or problem issues.
And in the last 12 months, there have been problem issues,
uh, some of which were addressed, uh, over the last couple
of years where, for example, the airport
or the Woodburn Airport
or, um, some of the, uh, uh, landlock scenarios
that have emerged as a result of weather,
but uh, have been tied into treaty settlements.
There's a couple of those places up at
and the center around the center of forest,
and a couple of things I call them.
But, um, we missed mis sorting them
during the settlement arrangements.
Nagi, uh, head of time at, they've got some legislation
that's underway, uh, to write, just, just
to correct some technical issues
that emerge outta settlement.
So you can use that as a proxy for success.
One indicator of success,
how many settlement obligations have been, uh, completed?
How many on track, yada, yada, yada, yet
to be triggered and delivery issues.
And when you chunk that down,
there's basically four big agencies, doc Lins, the Ministry
of Education that occupy about 60% to two thirds
of all settlement obligations.
Mm-hmm. Uh, now if those ones aren't performing very well,
then we've got, uh, and the role that
and responsibility that, uh, secretary has here is
to make sure that all agencies are performing a,
particularly being on the job with those four,
because they will make a very material shift in the delivery
against settlement obligations separately.
We have a accord, uh, of which there are nine,
and I don't think there's a real appetite
to create more accords.
Uh, that's not what I've heard.
But delivering on the courts
that we do have is very, very important.
Within those accords, there might be 80 to a hundred, uh,
uh, I call 'em KPIs, but action items, uh,
and some of those are going very well,
um, probably more than half.
Some of them need a bit more work in that.
And importantly, we have to make sure they
accord who we actually happens.
So we've had a couple of, um, swing
and misses this year, uh,
but they are happening with the Accord, accord two,
we, we went up to that.
So what I see within those accords, uh, as a way to, again,
measure as you've described, the strength
of the Mi Crown relationship is, are the accords healthy
and being delivered on?
So that's the second way we can measure that.
A third way that we can measure, of course,
is the engagement
through the Iwi Chairs Forum and other peak bodies.
Now, whilst, uh, uh, everyone knows that last year, uh,
we attended a couple of the Hui, uh, then we were disinvited
as the crown from the Hui, the mahi still continues.
So within the Iwi chairs forum, there are five po
and within those po there are various
work streams under one.
Those are getting reported on, uh, uh,
on a three monthly, four monthly basis.
Uh, some I think are going very well.
So you look at example Ho who Only, which is led
by Mar Ma Royal,
and Simon Watts on the ministerial lead side has a couple
of, um, work, uh, work streams, particularly
around the resilience of Mara.
Uh, and some work has been undertaken to review, uh,
the climate resilience.
I think of all Mara in the country,
definitely all the iwi ma, uh,
and I think some Mara more pan tribal.
And that's resulted in a couple of action items like, uh,
the water, uh, uh, um, mahi Mar
Marai during the week of, uh, Ang week earlier this year.
So those po five within there, which is from, again,
another proxy to demonstrate the success or
otherwise of the Crown Maori relationship.
And then there's a whole range of other items, some
of which get described in the house, uh, and just
and debated in the house, where I think that, uh,
there's another way to measure that.
Uh, and of course, some people might refer to he
and other matters as a demonstration of how healthy
or not that relationship is.
Can you give us up? No, I'm happy. Give
Hu Thank you, minister, and, um,
and appreciate that feedback.
I know, you know, we measure, um, sometimes the success
of a Crown Maori relationship based on the number
of settlements or, you know, the progress of a settlement.
Um, but, you know, let's, let's delve into
what is the health of the Crown Maori relationship
across all of its spheres,
and what's the work plan of de Corty now
that they do have this relationship, um, sphere of ti
or ti are coming across the TPK?
So what is the work plan
to really get out on the gr boots on the ground
and, um, yeah.
Test, uh, the health
of the relationship across the Maori community,
hapu iwi moving forward now that this is the role of proper?
Well, I think that, um, you know, I've identified three,
uh, touch points, which can be used as indicators
of success, but I don't think that they are exhaustive
by any stretch of their imagination.
And if the view is that, uh, we're gonna go into, uh, the,
I suppose another way to look at it is
what are quantitative indicators
and what are qualitative indicators?
And certainly from the quantitative front, when I go
through those particular indicators, those three spheres,
uh, I think there has been progress.
I think that actually that's going okay.
The qualitative, which is a lot more subjective,
I think is often dependent on, you know, um,
how people feel on the day
or, uh, a a a series of engagements in part, a series
of, I suppose, inquiries as to
how people are feeling about that relationship.
Now, that doesn't necessarily mean, um, if we go
through a survey or something like that,
that there's no progress.
Often there is progress,
but that doesn't obviously get emphasized in,
you know, the media reports.
I'll give you an example, said that Sunday I went to look
to do a, I didn't make it to the tool
and the two mo apologies,
but it's a sort farm, um,
farming arrangements out at field days.
We, uh, have been working very closely to ensure
that there are houses developed around the country
and bolting on from work over the last five, 10 years,
uh, and offer to two B
and seven D uh, have been delivering about nine,
five houses out behind Fresh Choice on Tang I Road.
Now they are a credible shock. Mm-hmm.
You know, you've got people like Jason Rogers and Ron
and Bennett and others who are doing a great job.
Well, we've seen that credibility work,
and now we've doubled down on that, uh, by enabling some for
to B 70 to develop 39 homes over in Tu on the other side of,
uh, uh, if you get into that housing space,
like thousand houses were enabled through labor support,
and we'll get to housing specifically since we've come into
administration, another thousand houses has been enabled
through, uh, the support of this government.
And in addition, you have some other arrangements
that's just to have mighty housing money,
another arrangements for Papa and the mainstream funding.
So I think that whilst, um, uh, the boots
and all, um, on the ground engagement is important
from a qualitative level, you'll find that when you go
to engage with folks like Rona or Jason on all two B
and 70, they're very enthusiastic about the support
that was given under the previous government, the support
that has been given under this government,
and ultimately the type of, uh, um, delivery
for whanau in need.
So when we're at all two B
and 70 outta, uh, we came across some
of the whanau that are living in those houses right now,
I was stoked about
how the government had supported their own whanau trust
to build those homes.
And now they've got not only better TGA connection,
but they're going into the marai on a, on a regular for WA
and pipeline credit card.
I think that's a good thing. And if you wanted me to say,
okay, can you get out
and find out at a qualitative level how people are feeling,
I think there'd be some surprising
Results. I, I wanted to ask,
just in terms of budget uplift,
I recognize are the front door often for TWI Maori.
Absolutely. Um, and, and that's where I guess I'm leading
to, in terms of you've received these additional services
or string to the bow, um, will we see, um,
more boots on the ground
because the are valued in our communities
and they are the front door, they're like, you know, the,
they're the, in terms of the suite of services available
for the crown that, that are available for Maori.
So, I mean, it's a great opportunity. That's what I'm
Sharing. David. Um,
just
In terms of boots on the ground, has regional offices,
as you know, didn't, so, um, if anything,
there will be an increase in terms of boots on the ground.
Good. Uh, tuck,
Yeah. K
just following on from her's.
Umai. Yeah.
So how will we see, so we, the, the department is,
is receiving, you know, this, this new transfer of, so
will we see, you know, that you more growth in terms
of, uh, yeah.
Growth or retention around, um, Kai for TPK,
because like Han said, they are the boots on the ground
and knowing that the department has had a $34 million
decrease, you know, how can we ensure that
that is going to occur?
Well, um, the funding
that came over from Maori crown relations
and the was mainly for salary budget.
And the people and the positions
came over too. I think there were
4, 4 44 positions.
44, 4 of those were people
And 24 in those positions.
So all that came lifted and shifted, uh,
and integrated now within 20.
Uh, but my expectation is that, uh,
there will be more people
as a result of that lift and shift.
Uh, and some of that will be regionalized.
Uh, certainly when you come
to implementing settlement obligations, a lot
of those mahi a lot of that may happens in the regions,
so it has to be on the ground.
Yeah, absolutely.
Just in terms of the implementation is not implementing
the treaty settlements, that is the responsibility
of those agencies who've been tasked with that function,
and whether that be in education, whether that be in health,
whatever those commitments are, our role is
to hold them to account.
Their role is to put boots on the ground and deliver that.
Now, we'll facilitate that with our regional staff,
but I just wanna be clear, our role is to hold them
to account and monitor those treaty settlements.
And we have to remember that we're talking about 30 years,
and the Auditor General's report over the last 30 years has
been that those settlements have been viewed
as transactional by the agencies.
And there hasn't been a holistic
or strategic view on how we could best
position those post settlement
governance entities for the future.
That is a function that UNI will think about in terms
of our policy going forward.
Um, but it is a low bar. It has not been going well.
UNI has got to fix this,
and that's not going to happen quickly.
There are some processes that we can, we can follow, um,
some immediate processes.
And an example of that is having report backs from all those
agencies against TETA to identify their commitments
and what has been achieved, and then work with agencies
to identify where the gaps are,
and then report this calendar year back, uh,
to the government in terms of what has been achieved.
But it's a start point. I view the Office
Of Auditor, the Auditor Generalist report,
almost like a performance improvement framework
for commitments on treaty settlements.
I think, uh, just to echo some of the sentiment
that Dave shared, one of the good functional, um, changes
that's gonna be undertaken for to hire,
which is the mechanism
through which settlement obligations are effectively
monitored, is ensuring that non-core Crown Agency
commitments are now recorded into,
'cause that hasn't happen today.
And a lot of the commitments across the three settlement
obligations space actually are not core
Crown by non-Core Crown.
So just getting that onto HI is a good step,
but ultimately, Dave's accurate in the sense that most
of the, uh, commitments are nearly all
of them actually are outward agencies, core
or non-core Crown role of 20 is to make sure
that there are systems in place to enable that.
We had the whole of system government report last December
at cabinet, and I think people got a bit of a surprise,
not just with the nature of that report,
but the fact that there are so many obligations.
And I don't think anyone in 1993
or four, uh, when some of us were fortunately worked the 20,
uh, probably imagine that we were going to be 20
or 30,000 settlement obligations.
Yeah, it's materialized.
We we are responsible for that,
and now we've gotta go out and deliver.
Uh, and, uh, we're pretty, um, geared up and to do that.
The other thing is that, um, you know,
and I expect Dave to have the relevant court at all
with Sir Brian Roach and others, making sure
that the settlement commitments are, are, are, are, uh,
upheld, uh, in my view is a discussion around
performance expectations of all the chief executives.
Uh, and we'll leave that discussion forward, public service.
But I think there's one way to incentivize shift
and change in organizations to say it's part of
CEO performance expectation,
and hey, that's a discussion to be had, uh, with Dave
and Roach and others.
Okay. Willie, uh, minister,
just further to your minister, in terms of
the broader aspects in terms of public agencies, you know,
and to Maori, Dave, I want to know
what's the response being given the auditor general
Scathing, scathing
and his review of public agencies, uh, treatment
of Hapu and Iwi, uh, in main and,
and said that they had to get their act together
because it was basically belittling
and humiliating for our iwi and, uh,
and hapu in terms of fulfilling the obligations
of treaty settlements.
What's the response for, to GPK to that in terms of public
agencies fulfilling their obligations?
Um, I,
I would describe it as a wake up call mm-hmm.
In terms of the, um, commitment to those settlements.
And there are some truths there
that provide opportunities for the future.
Mm-hmm. I mentioned transactional, seeing the settlement as
the end, when really it's the end of the beginning.
And if we think about Maori development in its whole
context, what we have at the end of a settlement
is a post settlement governance entity.
And that post settlement governance entity has come about
through engagements with the crown on a treaty settlement
that sometimes can take decades.
And at the end of that process,
and quite a lot of resource, human resource
and money from both sides, what we have at the end of
that is an entity located in the regions that has agency,
that has credibility, has resource,
and has ongoing commitments from the Crown.
That's quite important to note.
And I, and, and I'm not sure that, uh, that everybody sees
that because we see the transactional.
So what can be achieved?
Now, we know that every settlement entity now is either a
billion dollar entity or a multimillion dollar entity.
The government's focus is on regional development.
Where is the opportunity side of this,
that the orders general's right,
in identifying the obligations,
and we need to, we need to meet those obligations.
But there's two sides to this coin.
There are some opportunities here.
And those opportunities are
around those significant entities with agency credibility,
a a community of constituents that we describe as fund
and the wider community.
So I I I think it was, um,
a wake up call. Can I, can
I ask what the response has been?
Have has, has the department
or the minister met with the auditor General to, to, uh,
Okay. Roll out
a strategy in terms of dealing with this?
'cause our people should not have to put up
With us, should they? There
are a number of, um, immediates, um, I met
with the Auditor General, right.
And, and, um, was briefed by him.
And then our process going forward, uh,
the minister has written to all of the other agencies
and ministers around their commitments and,
and ensuring that they take seriously the report
and enter their data into te by the 30th of June this month.
And then, um, our monitoring team is responsible
for processing that data
and pulling together a report that, as I say, will be ready
by the end of this year, calendar year.
And then we will continue
On this journey.
But it, but it's not gonna happen overnight. Can
I ask the minister though, Dave Minister, uh,
have you addressed this with your colleagues?
This is, uh, this is incredibly important as you are.
Yeah, it was very important. And are they treating
this seriously or not?
The answer to the first question is yes.
I have, uh, communicated very formally around, uh,
my expectations not only when engaging on the whole
of system report that was presented to cabinet in December,
uh, but subsequent to that,
and in the context of the OHA report, a letter to ministers,
I also have to undertake some bilateral meetings in their
calls, uh, around not just the, uh, uh,
obligations, the Crown has under treaty settlements
to various iwi organizations,
but also how that, um, in some ways synchronizes, uh,
or better enablers the delivery
of the government's targets and priorities.
Because those things don't sit in a, um,
in a mutually exclusive space.
Some of them do have some overlap, uh,
and for us, of course, we've got government targets
and priorities, but we've also got these legal obligations.
And if we can do some of those things at the same time,
well, hallelujah are many to that.
Um, I'm all about that
because, uh, that can help drive some efficiencies.
Now, uh, I think that ultimately, uh, uh,
the, uh, the ministers, uh, have responsibilities
and at that agency level, particularly in you take
for example, doc Direct General, very committed
to giving effect to, uh, section four
of the Conservation Act,
but also delivering on those obligations set out on various
settlement arrangements, uh, very, very much so.
And ultimately enabling a culture within each
of the individual agencies that is minded to give, uh,
effect to three principles.
But the settlement obligations is very, very important,
particularly for doc, which is by far
and away the most obligations of any agency
across government around this stuff.
So, again,
I think Dave is very reasonable in saying it's a multi-year
sort of effort.
And so far, I think it's about 40% of the obligations
that are, have existed have been delivered and completed.
There's a whole bunch that are on track
and some that have some issues.
But the ones that have major issues, that's not 150,
that's about 20, uh, that have major issues.
And we're dealing with them one by one some very well,
and Woodburn are great examples.
Others are a little bit more nuanced,
but, uh, um, uh, are are definitely identifiable.
So the answer is yes, uh, around ministerial, um,
commitment or responsiveness to that, that's work on.
Um, and that's how it's any good. Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Um, I must put
On the record minister, um, uh, the disappointment of
with receipt, with respect to the comments made
by your colleague yesterday about sovereignty.
So my question to you respectfully, with respect
to the budget, is around the budget that's been allocated
for events and the paradox, uh, of the position that,
well, the more you settle fewer, you sure, the less you need
to spend on the kind of engagement to get more Maori, uh,
settlements across the line.
Uh, and so my question
to you is specifically about the Maori engagements, one,
the matrix by which you make your
decisions to allocate that money.
Maori events, Maori major events and engagement, uh,
and two, whether or not you
are satisfied, that's enough running.
So there is a very small, um, strength, uh, of, uh,
appropriation available for Maori, uh, um, events
of significance to Maori ground munitions.
Uh, out of that string, there is some support, uh, given
to white work.
Uh, and that's marvelous.
And not only is that support given through that fund,
but there's also some additional support that's given
through the defense fees, which you are,
uh, very well aware of.
Uh, there are also opportunities across,
not just government, but also iwi to conduct events
that don't necessarily draw on that very, very small fund,
uh, for example, funding that fund.
Uh, other, um,
agencies might also undertake events themselves
and provide pya, uh, to enable those events
of significance to take place.
Uh, do I think that the, um, uh, fund is
of a sufficient size in order
to accommodate, uh, all those events?
Well, I'd say what is the role of that fund?
That's the most important thing.
The role of that fund is to support events of significance.
There is funding there, uh,
but it's not, um, a magic money tree either.
It's a very, very small fund.
Uh, and do I think it's the responsibility of
multiple agencies to build
and conduct relationships in a meaningful manner, enhancing,
but also, um, uh, good faith manner to
evolve and positively promote relations.
Absolutely. It's not just the responsibility of that fund,
which is a very, very small fund to drive those events,
but the, the events which are supported by that fund, uh,
in my view, uh, have gone very well by taking a week.
Um, this year was a great example of that,
and there've been some others.
And of course, there's one next week. Yes, Tara.
Yeah. So, uh, those,
those events are spread across the tu different things, uh,
and I look forward to continuing
to support ka those sorts of,
Um, good morning. Morning.
I'll just go back to, um, the OAG report, um,
with respect to, uh, upholding treat settlement obligations.
Um, you mentioned earlier, um, Mr.
Samuels that by the 30th of June, um, there'll be some, um,
there's going to, is it going to be a Hui
or a report back to you about, um,
The agencies are responsible
for providing the data on settlements into
the reporting mechanism?
Yeah. Okay. And so that's when we, um, analyze
that from that time period.
And so I'm curious, with the anana an analysis
that's going to take place, um,
what do you envisage in terms of, um, uh, do you feel
after that that, um, report back, you'll be ready
to go organs blazing with, um,
with following up on these, uh, obligations?
Or do you, I know that we said it's going to be a bit
of a while, but I'm just curious that first, um,
report back, how much is it going to give you insight into
what needs to happen next?
Well, it'll give us, um, insights against
where we have moved against
what the Auditor General has already reported on.
Yeah. So, um, it'll, it'll give us that information,
but it'll, it'll all, it'll also provide us
with an opportunity to identify
how granular is this?
Like, for example, one treaty settlement that is not, um,
that has not been achieved, if you like, in terms of, um,
the commitment is not the same as another.
Yeah. Yeah. So counting them both as one is really blunt.
And, and I'm not a data analyst 80 is here
to talk about this, but, um, we,
what I have said is we do need to be really clear about
what we are talking about, the significance
of the different commitments.
There are 14 and a half commitments, uh, 14
and a half thousand, sorry, commitments.
Yeah. Not all of them are the same.
And so to hire at the moment provides us
with some information.
But my, my push to staff is how useful is that?
How more do we have to be more granular
and how do we chuck this down to, um, early wins,
for example, um, the big issues, the main the main gains.
Yeah. How do we, how do we do that?
And aid can talk to this as a, as our data specialist.
Thank you. So one of the things that was recommended
by the audited generals report was the actual validation
of the statuses that are being entered
by the Crown agencies.
And one of the ways that we are seeking to do that,
and was suggested by the auditor General as well, was
to actually seek the views of PSGs.
Mm-hmm. So the post 30 June activity will include the
regional getting out into the regions and talking to PSGs
and asking them based on the analysis that we received
through to hia, the reporting tool,
actually, are they accurate?
Do they agree with what the crown has be the status
of a particular commitment?
Thank you. Um,
so I'm hearing all the mahi that's being, uh, undertaken,
uh, throughout the department and the new responsibilities.
And there's, uh, lots of action items identified,
and there's that pressure and need to deliver.
So how will, uh, vote Maori development support TPK
to grow new capacity
and capability across the public service
as part of headquarter?
Well, part of the lift and shift,
and Dave can, um, corroborate this, uh, has been making sure
that the mahi was undertaken under the work stream, uh,
which is lifting the, uh,
public service capability in this space.
And which dovetailed off, uh, uh,
statutory provisions in Public Services Act.
I think, uh, Dave, uh, is to make sure
that there is some mahi undertaken
across different agencies.
Uh, I think at a very basic level,
like legal obligations in those agencies, the settlement,
uh, obligations is a good indicator of whether
or not we've got, uh, a set of agencies that are responsive
to these issues and that are actually in the zone.
'cause that's a legal obligation.
That's not sort of a nice to have.
That's actually, um, need to sort space
and making sure that we've got good ballast
and, uh, penetration into those issues.
Uh, with the type of, uh, um,
confidence is way that ad, I think,
described in different ways that they are doing it in a way
that, uh, PSGs and the agencies both can put their hands up
and say, yes, that has been done very, very well.
Uh, for each individual obligation.
I think that's a good proxy to say whether
or not we've seen capability movement
across the public service.
There may be, uh, and there are other ways to measure, uh,
that capability lift, uh, lift.
Uh, and maybe Dave can have a comment on,
Um, again, uh, going to the auditor general on transfer
of those responsibilities.
We met with the auditor General, um, who are doing a, um,
an audit, if you like, an audit report on, um,
and, and how that has progressed.
So we get a, we get a baseline, um,
and we will be looking at that framework.
That framework, um, is one that exists from Tower 50.
So that'll be our start point.
But with the auditor general's view on how
that has been implemented and the, um, the pros
and the comms in that regard.
But there are some differences that we are looking at
or some areas of, um, improvement.
Improvement and concern.
And, and one is around, uh, um, policy thinking
around Maori policy.
Yeah. And making sure that it's a fundamental baseline
for public servants.
'cause it's not at the moment.
Um, it's, it's not clear to public servants
when we are engaging with Maori, in what capacity
is the Maori that we are engaging with operating?
What is the, is it as a, a representative of, of the iwi?
Is it as an individual?
And just understanding the different roles that
around this table we all play.
Um, and, and knowing as a public servant who we are engaging
with and for what purpose.
But in terms of the framework, um, Tarina, do you want
to talk more broadly about that?
Yeah. Um, yeah.
So we've had was implemented in 2020.
2020, and has been running
through Tata for the last four years.
Um, as Dave and the minister have spoken about,
it has focused, um, very heavily on workforce
and capability lift.
Um, we are in a position now where we want to think about
how do we measure that capability lift
and how does that translate into, for example, um,
the relationship strength through settlements work.
Um, so part of the minister's focus on lifting, um,
quality and monitoring of the public services.
We are looking at how do we measure that four years
of investment and focus, um, and whether
or not that's the appropriate, um, approach to go now.
So that work's being committed.
Um, we're committed to looking at that right
Now. So, um, can
I just add, uh, uh, a comment please, Mr.
Chair in response to, uh, Partai and observation is,
and this sort of starts getting into part two
or tab two of our structured agenda, having some consistency
around the way, uh, we apply to tgi, uh,
within the public sector is I think one
of our major priorities.
Uh, and we use the total framework to enable that
because doc's a great example, right?
Most of the issues that Doc contend with
are iwi, hapu issues.
They're not pan tribal issues.
Uh, and if you have an agency
that's really in the pan tribal head space around,
let's say the management, uh, of
resources out on Planet Dock, other conservation land,
and you've got an agency
and it's team that are really looking
through a panic tribal lens, that's a, that's a problem
because dock land, uh, is generally, uh,
and the responsibilities
of DOC at a local level are generally iwi iwi, hapu
oriented, and looking through a pan tribal
lens, I think is quite risky.
It's more an iwi hapu lens
and making sure that agencies, their teams, uh,
the Kama here across government understand how are you,
uh, what lens you look through when dealing
with these issues that affect us as Maori
or Iwi members has the right lens on,
if you've got a concave lens
and it's a convex issue, well there's gonna be an issue.
You have to get that right in your mind.
So, strengthening the policy leadership role through to
making sure we understand
how these issues are best approached
and understood, I think it's very, very important.
We don't get that right. Then we do get, um, uh, some Mickey
and Mickey sort of results,
and I don't think that, that we've really gripped
that up well as governments over time.
Sometimes we do it well,
and then sometimes it sort of gets a bit confusing.
So, um, making sure that there are, uh, engagements
between point of and other agencies is what Dave
and the team are undertaking, having some pilot discussions.
And of course, Dave's, uh,
and the team's advice now do have
that lens totally your normal lens, uh, as one of the,
I call it filters, sections of the advice that I receive.
And I'm sure with all the OAA requests
that you guys put in, you'll see that
We are a little bit over time with this section,
but it's an important section.
I'm gonna take one last question before we move
On. Yes. Can
I, um, ask you, minister, um, given, uh,
uh, what's happened with, given the limited Pier,
given that it's still a new entity in many ways, um,
are we wasting our time?
Should, should, uh, should TPK
be the overriding entity?
Uh, and we just make a department of
of TPK because there is limited funding?
Uh, my experience,
and I'm sure it'd be, uh, the, I like to hear, uh,
Dave Samuel's view on this is that there was always a lot
of tripping over each other, uh,
and, uh, getting in the way.
And I just asked the question as we round off, this is a,
and we wasting our time here
and just, shouldn't we just give TPK the mandate
to oversee everything, uh, rather than muck around with ji,
which is really just getting peanuts from
your government? No,
I Don't agree. You don't agree,
um, with most of what you've said.
Okay, we'll move on now. But,
but the thing is that to point, uh, sorry to,
when you rewind to when we both had here in 1994, uh,
was set up as the Office of Treaty Settlements
and people like Belinda Clark
and others were, um, basically, uh,
allocated various responsibilities within the Office
of Treaty settlements that set, uh, adjacent to the Ministry
of Justice or Department of Justice might being called them
to really focus on helping to execute treaty settlements
between the Crown and Iwi.
Uh, and in some instances, very lucky instances,
hapu like Tua.
Uh, and focusing on that role
and being really determined to close out some
of the remaining settlements, the biggest one of which is,
but also others like, uh, is the core function
of, and that was the basis of one of the papers
that we presented to Cabinet in August last year, to say,
actually, if you're trying to cut the deal
and then say how it should be implemented afterwards,
that has some confusing incentives and drivers.
'cause you're trying to cut a deal on behalf of the Crown
and, um, in some ways bad jelly the witch.
And tomorrow you're trying to be als I don't think that,
I'm sure Dave will agree with me, wouldn't he?
Yeah. Well, we'll get today,
but making sure there's clarity on
what agency is responsible for, what responsibility
is at the heart of that paper course
has some statutory responsibilities.
And, and usefully they also synchronize
with some of the appetite of the government
to drive it targets and priorities.
And we suitable community led, uh,
devolution for want of a better term.
Uh, and that really came out of paler way back when, 19 9 1,
uh, and, and other various, uh, programs.
So I don't subscribe to that view,
and I don't think it's really your view.
I think that might've been just a patsy,
but being absolutely clear about the responsibilities is
something we should do across all government agencies,
but particularly a space which can be quite, uh, charged,
given the inequalities that our communities face, uh,
and also some of the shortcomings around the implementation
of settlement obligations.
We have to be clear, this is the job of
do it very, very well.
This is the job where multiple jobs to put in
do them very, very well.
Uh, and then we'll be, I think, a lot safer, uh,
in making sure that, um, we know who's doing what.
Because what we don't want is a prop
masquerading just the first five
Look, I don't
Think you want any more.
I, I agree with the minister.
Good. I'm disappointed,
Dave. But really,
um, un until 2017,
we were always responsible for the relationship
and having a clear delineation between the one who,
who has got to negotiate away, you know, the li uh, the,
um, liabilities for the crown in terms
of the treaty settlements
and the other agency, my agency that's responsible,
if you look at the act to, uh, promote increases,
increases in the achievements of mine,
those are quite different responsibilities.
I would not want to be going in one day
and negotiating hard on a settlement
and then going on in, on the next day with the same people
and talking about, um, section five one A of my act,
which is promoting increases in the levels of achievement.
Those are two different things.
Okay. We'll put on record that the minister, thanks,
uh, Woolley for the Patsy.
And we'll move on to the, the next, uh, area, which is the,
uh, government priorities and proposed department spend.
So you have any questions in that area?
Side, on the side,
right, other side.
Look, I'm, um, I'm interested in the, um,
the extra funding for Maori wardens, Maori wardens, um,
plays such a strong role in, um, in many respects.
And, um, and minister, if you can walk us through
and, um, um, Mr.
Samuels, the, um, the, the, the reasoning behind that
and, um, and what you have,
Let's just contextualize
what's happened by way of the vote.
Uh, there's been some, uh, reduction in the vote savings
grants and funding and baseline savings
and time limited funding.
Yes. Okay. So that's the first thing.
So some total, um, uh,
uh, vote.
The Maori development has come down some, then there's been,
uh, some increase in the vote, uh, from the commitment
that we have made to, uh,
two fantastic organizations being the Maori Women's Wealthy
League Maori
and the wa Maori, the Maoris, uh,
and the Maoris, uh, already had some funding, uh,
and they want
to get into the operational dynamics of how that lands.
Uh, but they have effectively, uh, been allocated an extra
of $1.791 million per annum in the baseline.
And the function and the role
and responsibilities that Maori wars
undertake all volunteers.
BTW, uh, is very, very physical.
So all the big Maori iwi hui that I've been to, uh, whether
or not they're the T and
and others, Maori Waldens are there, you go to other big Hui
like and related Hu
and Maori wars are there, even down at the Frank to markets.
Maori wardens are there. And I actually caught up
with Linda, uh, uh,
last week down at the KO Awards in
Christchurch, and she was there too.
Papa. Yeah, papa.
So Maori wardens are everywhere volunteering
and needs some pier in order to better organize their, um,
allocation, roles, responsibilities,
coordinating their teams and whatnot.
And I think it's absolutely fantastic.
That's supported by the Deputy Prime Minister, uh,
the Minister of Finance minded to, um, encouraged
and ultimately agreed to an increase for the funding
for the Maori war wardens.
Uh, and we recently had a bit of an announcement in
or to Hamilton West regarding Smith
Kush. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Um, minister, we know
that the Maori economy is the rockstar right now, uh,
Especially farmers.
Um, Maori contribute 5.9 billion to the economy.
Uh, do you have a plan, a specific action plan to maintain
and grow that contribution?
Well, the first thing is that, uh, uh,
there's been some existing vote funding
for Maori women's development team.
That's 1.5, 1.5 grand baseline per annum baselined, uh,
for NWDI, which I think is a good start
to supporting white Maori in business.
And, uh, those white Maori do some amazing things
and we can rip out some names, whether or not it's K Nathan
or Tracy Hope, whoever it might be,
leaders in their own spheres
and, uh, leaders of organizations.
And one step that we took with the support, uh,
of the Deputy Prime Minister
and the Minister of Finance was provide some PIA
for the Maori Woman's Wealthy League, of course,
being the ultimate governor owner
of Maori Woman's Development.
So an additional $1.5 million, uh,
baseline funding, uh, over the four year budget period.
Uh, and details are here to be confirmed around how, uh,
outcomes outputs from contractual arrangement can be
landed in that respect.
I think how you've described, um, uh,
Maori woman leadership might actually be, uh,
even understated, uh, Kush
because, you know, there are so many Maori organizations
that have had phenomenal Maori leadership
partnership being one of them with Dam Ingrid Cos, uh,
but others that we're all aware of, uh,
and certainly, uh, uh, from our view,
making sure we continue to sponsor
and support Maori women into board appointed positions
by the government is top of mind.
And I don't think if, uh, anyone around this table, well,
maybe some of you are intelligent ones, know that
27% of all Maori, all board appointments
by the government are Maori in 15 of
that 27% are Maori women.
So in terms of appointments from the board, recognizing the,
um, competencies
and capabilities of Maori women by way
of the government appointed board members,
and don't forget, we a point,
I think it's 850 boards every year as a demonstration
of the ongoing, no matter who's, uh, running government, uh,
appreciation and acknowledgement of
that capability and capacity set.
And, um, de Maita is very pleased with the minister for,
um, getting Maori Women's Welfare League into the budget.
Noted, not I'll see here at church.
Um, with that, you know, you mentioned the word continue,
so, um, the statistics,
you've said yourself, we still need to grow them.
Are you committing to future investment
to grow their capacity?
Well, I think there's, um, significant investment already.
Uh, but we've got to really, I think as a government say,
and as a country recognize
how community led whanau centered, um,
organizations can actually better deliver
many, many public services.
And many of those are actually led by WA ma, uh, whether
or not that's some of the primary water providers, uh,
out there or, uh, other organizations, uh,
and making sure that, um,
not only is there something specific like the allocation
and baseline to Maori Warrens Wealth legal and WDDI,
but really driving at that community, uh, um,
that Wau Center Copa, it's not just whanau water,
but there's a whole range of organizations
and supporting, uh, better, more effective delivery
of public services with organizations that are led
by Maori woman, uh, are right behind that.
Whether or not that's people like, um, uh, lady, uh,
or others who do some amazing things in the community.
Uh, so I think
what you're saying is will you have more funding
or preparation specifically towards wa Maori?
I think we will landed it as good for now.
Uh, but importantly on that other space, which is
better delivery of, or more effective delivery
of public services by local organizations, which are led
by Absolutely.
I'm all for it.
One of our, um, responsibilities,
and I have touched on it, is, um, say it word for word
'cause it's quite important, um, under our act is to monitor
and liaise with those agencies who are responsible
for services to inform Maori
to ensure the adequacy of those services.
That's section five one B.
Um, and it's a statutory function that's a function that,
um, hasn't been done by for some time
that we are reinvigorated
after the August, August cabinet papers.
Part of that, my expectation from particularly my monitoring
team, Tarina
and Co, is to make sure when we look at
who is being serviced, um, by those public service agencies,
we don't just look at Maori, we look at the wider fund,
including m
Yeah.
Can I, um, just, uh, double up
or trickle down on those comments?
You know, you, you take a, a, a, um, point small
that's at, uh, some of the drivers
of housing projects
that have been undertaken across the country.
So in, for example, at, uh, the
adjacent to the hospital specifically announced
or none other than, um, I dunno if it's honorable Willy, uh,
uh, but definitely some, um, definitely much.
Well, Willy really focused on single w Maori with kids.
So at that edge of provision of housing
by Maori housing providers, we are getting very direct, uh,
messaging that actually this is around driving
for Waine who have kids in a very, very difficult space.
Unfortunately, in that instance incident, it's adjacent
to a hospital in healthcare.
And I'm really motivated
and inspired by that type of, uh, commitment, uh, to
what Maori, particularly those that are quite exposed
to some of the vagaries of the economic situation
and social situation that we have.
But I find that when we cut through a lot
of the bureaucracy speak at the community end,
there is a lot of, um, drive
and a lot of motivation around whanau, particularly, uh,
leading those whanau.
Now, other people might have a different stance on things
and a different, Steve, you know what I mean?
I'm seen you everywhere, uh, might have a different view on
that, and that's case pie.
But my view is that when I, um, uh, peel back the layers
of the onion and the banana, uh, I find that at that level
of actual facilitation of outcomes, it's led by
what we do have in the housing space though,
is a serious challenge around older wa Maori sixties,
fifties, sixties, seventies,
with some very dire housing circumstances, uh,
and are unable to afford rent,
unable to afford their own home.
And that's a massive housing, uh, a massive challenge
and opportunity for those involved in the housing space,
particularly Minister Bishop and myself and Louise Upton.
Um, you mentioned the value of wahine in the whanau.
You know, for many of us it was our mothers who were, uh,
the role models in terms of the workforce.
And you've mentioned many great wahine who gr who've gr
risen to positions of leadership in ua,
but at the end of the day, wahine Maori still earn 20% less.
What specifically are you doing to address that?
Well, I think, um, that's, um, p gap is
how described often by people was real genuine.
And, uh, I've tried to make sure that, uh,
we're really clear and transparent about the pay gap,
but also the drivers, uh, around that pay gap.
Uh, and to figure out, okay,
how can we deal at a macro level with some
of the major economic issues so we can ensure that the wages
or the salaries of Maori rise, um, well the rest
of the economy in a faster way than the inflation
and the cost of living rises.
Uh, have we done enough in, in that space
to specifically attack that pay gap for Wahi Maori?
I think we could do a lot more, uh,
and be a lot more targeted at the macro level.
We're just trying to get things moving again,
like infrastructure opportunities
and, uh, you know, rolling back some of the
regulatory thicket, uh, that's stopping, um,
projects from happening.
But do we need to do, um, better or more?
Yes, the answer is yes.
Uh, uh, what do I need to do in order
to help give effect to that?
Or first be transparent about the, the, the, um, the stats.
It's Data Jedi, um, 80
and others, uh, are undertaking What are something specific,
well, we've got that stuff happening with NWDI
and Mighty W'S Wealth, but 3 million a year aren't
necessarily gonna move the dial.
Uh, what other things can we do?
Well, that's something that ultimately I need get better
advice on and go from there.
So it's on your agenda. It's definitely, um, uh,
an issue that I think of not once a year.
I get that regularly from my daughter. What are you doing?
Uh, so which isn't comfortable for me, um, good.
And my wife. Um, but, uh, it is an, it is an agenda issue.
Is it at the top of the, um, top of the, uh, list of things
that we have to contend with?
It should be near it to the top. Okay. We'll move to, uh,
Yeah, can't tell a lot.
Um, just following on from, uh, a strategy for
Maori have a very youthful young population, um,
one in three under 25.
Um, what strategies do you have for our Ranga Tahi
to bring them through the system to grow their young minds,
to build that capacity, um, across the department?
So I think the first thing is, just to go back to some
of my earlier statements in the sense that there,
there's not a lot of financial resource
relative relatively within the department, uh, to compared
to the rest of government, right?
And I think I mentioned
before, uh, less than 1%, I think it's less than 0.5
of the percent of the total vote
goes into Maori development.
So the capacity for us to do things, uh, in a, in a macro
and material way, uh, through program support
or through, uh, funding support is very minimal compared to,
let's say, education or other votes, which is a lot bigger.
Uh, it's the first thing.
Uh, the second thing, and going back
to the cabinet paper from last year, it's the responsibility
of 20 to hold these other agencies to count,
particularly given some of the,
the demographics stats which you've,
uh, accurately portrayed.
Uh, so what that means in practice is making sure, first
of all, we're very, very transparent about the stats
that continue to show disproportionate impact on Maori,
whether or not we're under 20 fours
or, uh, housing or other things.
Say for example, the needs situation, uh, not on employment.
Educational training for Maori is pretty di particularly in
a place like T and Makoto, uh, very, very challenged.
Uh, and for us, we don't necessarily find it easy, uh,
to address that, um, specifically where we come at it
for 24 purposes, as bearing very transparent about the data
and the monitoring and showcasing some
of the success stories, uh, around how
to reengage needs into educational training or employment.
Uh, and I think that ultimately many
of the agencies don't have a real grasp on how there's
so many successful, uh, programs
and, uh, work streams
that have been undertaken at a community level, uh,
but also randomly by, um, uh, government agencies
and philanthropy, uh, Phil philanthropic organizations
to help engage those young people.
And part of the role of particularly the regional, is to
showcase and demonstrate
that actually there are solutions within our communities
around some of the confronting
issues that our young people face.
But if you take great example, uh,
school attendance, right?
And the school attendance for, uh, Maori ten three,
2023 or ten four sorry's 33%,
and that's, that's shocking.
Um, if our aren't going to school, uh,
that has very severe, uh, uh, macro consequences later on.
So now, December term 4 20 24 went from 33
and 23 to 44 and turn 4 20, 24.
And my expectation, uh,
and impress upon day is to make sure that with the, uh,
um, the mahi that's been undertaken by Minister Seymour
and others to help incentivize
or drive, um, uh, those numbers
and ensure that more Maori kids go to school,
more than 44% go to school, is very,
uh, optimally informed by success stories.
Because if you say, there's only one way we're gonna do it,
this is the way, uh, we're gonna go out there
and, you know, um, uh, do it this way
to get Maori kids to school without having that granularity
and advice from various initiatives around getting Maori
to school, I don't think that that's
good public policy practice
or good implementation of the aspiration to have 80%
of kids attending school on a regular basis.
So what does that mean? That sounds like Goble guitar.
When I see what's happening, what happened at college
with these kids that Dana knows about, uh, the member,
they're 15 to 20 kids, young people, 14 to 16 years old,
they were at school to build houses for their whanau.
That's why they were gonna school.
They weren't gonna school for any other reason,
but they were inspired
and motivated by the fact that here had a contract
to build 20 houses on the east to
after East coast for their wau.
And these kids were engaged to go to school
and build houses for their well, I think that's awesome
because they learn about maths,
they learn about project management and everything else.
And the role of, and bringing up those, uh,
and showcasing those successful experiences
is very, very important.
It's easy for me, um, in some ways
because my kids are at boarding school,
they can't go anywhere but school.
Uh, but for many, many tens of thousands
of minor kids, that's not the case.
So I think just in that specific example
around kids attendance at school, the role of 24 is
to showcase what really works,
particularly in those schools,
which are formerly deciles one to five,
where most minor kids are.
Uh, and to show that actually there are some very,
very successful examples.
You look at, sorry,
uh, led by Tony Boy, uh,
and his wau, uh, down there, 80
to 90% attendance for a decal one score.
Why? Why is it that good, uh, to be TBK has
to tell the ministry, this is why this is the case,
and this is a pathway to success.
And it's not always the same everywhere around the country.
There are different drivers
that can enable young people's success. So,
Well, good. Um, uh, three
members are wanting to ask questions.
I've only got about eight minutes left,
so could I please ask people
to be succinct in their questions? So,
Willy, maybe you could ask the minister to be succinct.
It's, uh, with respect, of course, um, the, um, you've,
uh, certainly can see your commitment
minister to Kapa Maori.
Don't doubt that at all. Don't doubt that for one second.
Actually. Um, however, the facts say
that you are failing at the moment in terms of, uh,
targeted funding for Maori in your minister cabinet paid
entitled government action plan
to support Maori E economic Development.
It states that Maori economic growth is a portfolio priority
for the Maori development portfolio,
and it's a, is focused on improving wealth amongst Iwi,
Maori and New Zealand generally.
And, and, and that's absolutely spot on.
Problem is we've got a decrease right across,
uh, the portfolio.
So, couple of questions,
and if you, if you could be succinct, because,
'cause I've got a number of other questions too.
You've had this decrease in terms of, um, um, Maori funding,
targeted funding across the portfolio.
Uh, and you have a Deputy Prime Minister
who believes funding us is racist.
Claire is about, said that in terms of Maori television
and Maori radio, uh, and,
and it's been on, uh, public, public media too.
So how are you dealing with that?
Because I, we can hear your commitment.
I, I don't think anyone here would do that.
Doubt your commitment to Copa Maori and to our people.
But you have a deputy Prime Minister
undermining you at the moment.
Have you dealt with that? Have you got a plan going forward?
Um, how do you traverse that area given, um,
your commitment, given your department's commitment?
Um, is there hope for Maori given where your Deputy,
deputy Prime Minister lies is where his views lie?
Uh, I think there are a number of views in
that, uh, commentary.
And there might have been a question. Uh, and yeah,
The question is, have you dealt with the Deputy fire
Minister and, and, uh, there was a reflection on, uh,
a view of one of my colleagues, uh, that funding, uh, with
Maori funding as racist.
I don't share that view.
I have a different view, and I'd really appreciate, uh,
everyone, uh, in this, um,
meeting whose friends are journalists actually,
to amplify, amplify my view.
Uh, because what often happens, uh, is that certain views
are given, um, some really enhanced coverage
and others, uh, that I think are just as legitimate are not.
Uh, so first thing is that we have a, um, a, uh,
a very important series of commandments, uh, emanating out
of Wang in the Wang.
Uh, whether or not those are commitments around or, or
however Tonga we might want to refer to.
Uh, and that provides a very constitutional bedrock, uh,
for our existence as a country.
Uh, it amplifies
and reflects on things that were already existing.
That's the first thing. The second thing is
that when you consider the very disproportionate, um,
circumstances that our communities face, and the fact,
and I mentioned this before in my response to Tucker,
Ty's question about young people, that within us,
we have a lot of responses and answers
and solutions to those.
Disproportionalities, for example, gave that, um,
a reference around high attendance numbers
and a decile one type arrangement.
Uh, and part of that is motivated by cultural connection
between the KO and the Ranta and their au
but also the motivation that comes with that's going
to URA in that particular area five crossroads in Hamilton.
It's very, um, consistent with my way of thinking
that funding those with solutions
and outcomes for the targets
and priorities that the government had is actually, uh,
not necessarily a convenient thing to do.
It's a prudent thing to do.
So when you come down to how do we resolve or total au
and Hawi Maori organizations that are
geared towards delivering solutions in our community,
that actually probably in some ways better than the
government delivering the solution,
actually are all for them, right?
Why did we give money
to the Maori Women's Wealthy League and the Maori?
Because we actually believe that there is a way to do that.
So whilst there's been a comment point of order, Mr.
Yes. Yeah. The minister's getting
very long-winded questions. We've got four
Minutes later, so you got a quick
Thank you for turning up, Mike. Hold,
Hold on. We're chewing up time
with this. Please stop.
I was just, I respectfully asked
because Steve is up on time of order.
The minister's not answering the even, he's not even,
he's not even, he's barely addressing the question.
We want to know how he's dealing
with the Deputy Prime Minister's strategy in terms
of undermining and actually being successful and, and,
and knocking out Maori funding.
Well, no, and you have not given us one answer
Or any question.
What I've said is this, is that there's a number
of people not just in this room,
but in this precinct that have different views.
The Deputy prime Minister,
and I don't share a view around that particular, um, Copa.
I have a different view. Okay.
And I've given a context as to where my view comes from.
And that was asked that I heard something that
Body responds Something.
Have, have you got a quick sub?
I think that's sits consistently with this government's,
uh, focus, which is delivering better public services
as well as getting the economy back on track. Thank
You, minister. Quick
sub. Can, can, can I just wanna ask about a couple
of the programs, because, you know, you know, we've had,
how can Maori then, given, given that position,
have confidence in you, uh, given that, uh,
our targeted funding is being cut back, procurement,
which you know, all about being,
having been involved in that.
It's been cut back.
Uh, we've got Maori, uh, we've got treaty clauses minister
that are being just being knocked right out.
Uh, how can we have confidence in you as a minister, uh,
when, when, when that type of strategy is happening
with this government, all Maori initiatives are being
attacked by the Deputy Prime Minister,
and he has a clear strategy on that.
How do we, and I appreciate, I appreciate
what you're saying, but what is the strategy?
How can you give ta Maori some confidence in staff?
Aka you have to be careful, um, Mr.
Chair dressing up opinions as facts.
I think the view that all Maori initiatives have been under,
I didn't say all, I didn't say all
is unreasonable and inaccurate.
That's, I didn't say no.
You did say, well, Maori initiatives, well,
If I say thing, if I did say a lot, say many, let, let me,
many Maori initiatives have been attacked.
And some of those, which you would agree with,
And some of those initiatives, uh, don't sync
with the direction of travel this government is undertaken.
Now, the view that, uh, all clauses,
all initiatives are under tech.
Okay. We've, we've cleared that up
and you're saying many, there are some things
that we actually think are gonna be better delivered, uh,
through having very targeted COPA oriented funding.
And, uh, this government
and I, as the minister, uh, are in a space
where we've got serious fiscal issues.
And I don't need to belabor that,
but, um, taking the debt up from 5 billion
to a hundred billion did not help over five
or six years prior to I was coming in.
The second thing is that all agencies that basically, uh,
cutback except for health, education, defense,
and police, all agencies have had to take a haircut.
That includes my agencies
and Department of Conservation to point cooperative
and, uh, housing, uh, the view that, uh,
we don't have confidence
because your agency has less money than last
year, I think is misplaced.
Given the fiscal context.
What we are really focused on,
and you made mention of the Maori economic, uh,
Maori development fund is tilting, uh,
the support within the Maori economic development fund
towards economic development.
Uh, rather than bits
and bobs all over the place with different, um,
different funding drivers,
we are definitely driving into Maori economic development.
And that should be no surprise given, uh,
where the government is basically, uh, focused.
It's attention, which is getting the economy back on track,
supplemented by law and order
and public services issues. Okay, we're gonna
Close this section out with A final
Question from Steve. Steve,
thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Uh, minister, the Maori development budget on the whole is a
smaller budget by compared by comparison to others.
And yet this budget's been cut by 9.5%,
which is greater than the 6.5% the minister was
expecting of all ministries.
Is that consistent with the bias of this government
that has a suite of anti Maori anti treaty legislation?
Or is it a reflection of a failure on your part as minister
to advocate successfully?
Well, I, I think, And secondly,
I'll just do a follow up.
Um, how do you deal with the demoralization
amongst the ministry officials
and staff in the context of a government
that clearly has such, uh, a negative view of
targeted investment in Maori development?
Let's not clear up some of the disinformation they've, uh,
inculcated in this hui.
The 9.6% decrease is made up of 4.8%,
which was time limited funding, which was committed to
by a government you supported in
20 20, 20 23 as the green party.
So let's get that straight. There was time limited
funding that's coming outta the budget.
That was time limited. And when you had
labor led majority government,
that didn't put in the baseline, that's actually on you
as a Labor green coalition.
Second thing is this, is that all agencies,
I think except defense police, uh, health
and education have had, as you described it,
a bigger cut than the savings.
4.8% that's gone through the modern development portfolio.
And I'm actually very proud of the, uh,
that sit alongside me
and beside me for the work
that they do out in the communities.
The third thing, which is in a response, I think to your,
uh, conjecture around how the government is, um,
basically anti Maori, I think is very misplaced
demoralization of stuff.
I don't hear that from the staff.
I actually think, especially the staff in my office,
they love working for me in 4.4.
Okay, I think we're gonna take a break
and I ask that we reconvene when,
when our clocks on our phones turn, uh, 1103.
We will reconvene. Thank you.
Alarm.
No stopping from here. Yeah, three and a half straight.
No stopping. So what time's that point?
Four, four o'clock, half 12. I off you driving from here?
Yeah, half 12. I've gotta go. You can't fly, eh, around.
There's no fly unless you get a helicopter.
There's no flights. Why do only has like a, um,
very unusual arrangement.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. There's no flights. So three and a half.
No, stop. Okay. No, stop.
We better we'll draw the, uh, the meeting, uh,
to order in. Please.
Uh, as part of my, um, uh, to the committee,
I brought some, um, um, emergency chocolate
and I'll deliver these, um, by hand.
Ah, well, while you're doing that, I'm sure
that you can receive a question when we start this next
section, which is on the, uh, housing initiative funding.
Um, we've actually got 40 minutes.
I'm trying to get through the next three sections so quicker
so that we can leave a bit more time for
the last two areas that we've got here.
Okay. So, uh, housing initiative, funding.
Have we got any opening questions from this side of the,
I have when the minister's finished.
This is not an adjustment.
Oh, clear. This thanks. Oh, is the other one.
Oh, no, this is dark. It's ready.
You're listening
this chapter.
Okay. Okay.
Oh, well ate, um, we are into, so where'd you
Yep.
In terms of the homelessness, um, uh, uh, area, um, the,
obviously the, uh, uh, the,
this popup is incredibly important.
So I just want to g the recent announcement
and can you just, uh, give us a little bit of an
elaboration on that?
How were Maori providers catered for
with regards to that?
I have heard different in terms of
being factored out.
Um, maybe you could give us some elaboration there
because they, OO obviously it's a good thing Minister
congratulate you o on that.
I think it's too far away,
but still not gonna, uh, criticize a kopa
that's incredibly important for our people in awa.
But how were the Maori providers
of AWA accommodated in that process? Minister?
Okay. Context. It is one of the most deprived places
for housing in the country, along with,
in Northland there are pockets
of housing deprivation severe everywhere,
but those areas are very, very deprived.
Uh, there's been a huge effort over many years
to support more housing to be deployed into ua,
particularly, uh, in, in light of the serious
emergency housing situation
and the lack of coma water building in,
in UA over the last 10 years.
Recently, there was an announcement
around government support for
189 new homes to be built from UA
150 through community housing providers
determination on who yet to be finalized.
I expect that there will be some Maori housing providers,
Maori chips that will be included in delivering some
of those 150 homes.
Those 150 come out of the 1500 IRS funded places
for community housing providers in budget.
24, 10% of budget,
24 community housing provision commitments are separately,
there's 39 houses, uh, to be built, you know,
closed out by TU b
and seven D are na for related organization
because they are na they are for, uh,
they will build and close out 39 houses in tu.
So the announcement was over at,
but those houses that they will build under this
announcement are in TU 39.
There is another COPA going on there, uh, related
to 18 houses related to, uh, local iwi and Hapu.
Uh, that would be for another day.
Uh, but that's another 80 homes.
Uh, and, and again, that's a TBC to be finalized.
Uh, and I look forward to, uh,
an announcement in due course.
The view, uh, that, um, the, uh,
and others have not been included in this, uh, does not sit,
uh, comfortably with my understanding of everything
that's been undertaken with the Ular housing plan. Can
I just ask, is that the first time you've heard that? Uh,
No. No. You've
already heard that? No, No,
no, no.
Uh, but I, I have acknowledged it as a view,
but I do not believe that that view is accurate.
Given what I've described, 150.
I expect that Maori, um,
housing providers will be involved in those discussions.
The 39 is a organization will Beit at a whanau trust level.
And there's another 80 that are, uh,
being finalized right now with an iwi related organization.
And the housing plan between the council, Iwan
and ha, particularly for gowe, uh,
and stakeholders, uh, is underway
Because I do have some,
because, uh, so I'm glad minister
that you have heard that view.
That's the view that has been given to me that, uh, um,
the local tribe has been factored out.
I think that's unfair. You think that's unfair?
I think that's unfair, given what I've just described.
Yeah. And I, and there's still space to get
Involved. I, I appreciate your
response,
but it does bring to the table, um, uh, uh,
the question about why you abandoned,
uh, when we have the, in infrastructure in place,
when it is a clear strategy of by Maori, for Maori,
when it has been incredibly successful across, uh,
the country, uh, our people will see
that you have betrayed a COPA that is, uh, um, so
that has been so successful
and they can't get their, their heads around it,
that you would, um, be betray a COPA
and open up a competition that now that Maori providers have
to compete with mainstream providers.
Very unfair. It's already been proven that in the past.
And now that that opportunity has been opened up in terms
of mainstream providers, how do you, um, how do you support,
uh, or, or were you overwhelmed
or were you overwhelmed again by David Seymour in this area?
Or did David Seymour get his way,
why you would abandon such a successful program?
Like,
First I want to mihi to the architects of,
and the leaders like Kaka
and others across, uh, the public sector space
who are instrumental in facilitating
and enabling successful delivery of homes against f
absolutely outstanding course.
Thousand homes endorsed under the labored government, some
of which are yet to be built a thousand under the national
government in the last 18 months, many
of which are yet to be built.
Uh, but that's 2000 homes.
And also over and above that, some of the repairs work
and training and other things.
That's the first thing. Uh, the second thing is that
at the core of all the housing, mahi
right at the interface of
delivering public services better,
no matter if it's government or Maori housing providers
or others, is making sure whanau, particularly for me,
whanau Maori are big, um, uh, are, are,
are enabled to have adequate housing.
That's the rights as annunciated by international covenants.
It's annunciated through Bill of Rights documents
and a whole range of other things.
The pier, uh, that was allocated, uh, uh, within t corti
for papa and repairs and training.
Some of that has gone back to MA around the Iwi prototypes
and m HUD's best to engage with them.
Some of it has been, uh, savings, uh, that's been,
uh, removed from the Pu Corti budget.
Pon Corti still still has budget around Papa kga and repairs
and training that continues.
Uh, and that is, I think it's, uh, uh, just over 35 30
around 35, 30 5 million, 34.5, 34
and a half Swedish rounding.
Um, 35 million per annum for Papa kga and other things.
The budget, uh, which you've referred to,
and I think which has caused a lot of deep concern around
how that, uh, budget has moved into something different.
I just wanna, uh, address that issue. Now.
A whole range of funds across government
and in the housing space have been effectively centralized
and, uh, reallocated across projects in terms of the
budget that has effectively been
centralized and reallocated.
Some of that was the 200 million announced for 400
or more new homes, uh, as I announced in Yang Week.
That includes the 150 homes that are being built right now
by and anywhere here and others at TU
and Gisborne and a whole range of other homes.
So they're building one 50, a whole range of other homes
and sites across, uh, the motu, including up in,
uh, uh, and, uh, ROT
and Central North Island and other places.
So 200 million of the filed on a budget that you referred to
that has been centralized, has been allocated
for new housing across those areas.
And there's a number of projects, uh, in relation to same.
Some of the PIA has been used to shore up
the cost pressures that were not accommodated
by previous governments around housing first, uh,
transitional housing, uh,
and other provision of housing support,
which disproportionately affects whanau Maori.
There was no cost pressure, um, protection
for a lot of those programs by way of previous budgets.
And this government has had to use a range of, uh,
funding centralized
and then reallocated to protect, uh, the cost pressures
and actually deliver funding for many, many whanau Maori
who live in those transitional houses.
And those, um, housing first, uh, rapid rehousing
and other related relate arrangements.
So at the, going back to the kernel of what we're here to do
is to actually total whanau Maori, uh,
and ensuring that there is adequate
housing support for them.
So some of the Maori around the development space,
which you're referring to, funding,
has actually been tipped into a space where a lot
of Maori are, are accommodated
and housing, first transitional and other homes.
In addition, social housing in Auckland, which, uh,
I think we all know is disproportionately Maori.
And finally, a flexi fund, which has been referred
to in the housing debates, uh,
and other horal here in this precinct.
The flexible fund, uh, will give flexibility around
how, um, different organizations including Maori
organizations can access funding
that may not have already been accessible.
For example, some Maori organizations, which aren't chips,
I expect the flexible fund will include
criteria which enables them to access
IRS equivalent funding.
So what does that mean? Ultimately, uh,
there is some funding that's gone
to help Ana Maori on another side
where there have been cost pressures
which have not been addressed.
Social housing in Auckland, which is disproportionately, uh,
a number of Maori whanau Maori who need social housing
and a flexible fund, uh, which will enable different forms
of funding to Maori organizations that are not chips
because all the, and funding basically was going
into affordable rentals.
Now it's gonna be affordable rentals, RRS
and maybe some other things as well.
And some of the Maori organizations, uh,
development organizations, iwi prototypes
and others are trying to create mixed tenure developments,
but have only been able to access affordable rental funding
through, and then had to go around
to different agencies trying to sign up
to different types of funding.
So yes, acknowledge, uh, huge work by
over many years yet to be closed out.
Some of the iwi prototypes
and course we've got chair person, person one
of 'em here today fantastically that along
with a whole bunch of other funding, centralized
reallocated, some of which specifically
for Maori housing developers, some of which
to protect the situation that a lot of Maori wau live in.
Would you accept that it's a lot tougher now
for Maori providers given the change of policy in terms of,
uh, this government now having to contest
with mainstream providers?
Well, the criteria yet to be determined
around the flexible funding, uh,
and my, um, um, advocacy is that,
that it leans heavily into Maori providers
and gives them a broader suite of funding options
through one doorway.
Uh, secondly, I think it's important to contextualize
that question around, is it going to be harder
for whanau Maori to get adequate housing as a result
of this, uh, decision?
I think that's yet to be seen.
And as I described it,
when you have a previous budget arrangement,
when there is no cost pressure protection, a whole bunch
of housing that accommodates whanau Maori,
it's probably too early to tell
650 million.
I think we worked out being transferred outta
rung over the last two years.
Dave might be able to give us the exact number.
I, I'm not sure around the, the number,
you're the minister responsible for the biggest transfer
of money from Maori
to mainstream in the history of ministers.
Um, how did you deal with that?
I'm sure that, uh, uh,
that wouldn't have been your preference, uh,
when this kopa was put up at cabinet.
Well, I think we have to be careful around fuzzy math, uh,
200 million of a number.
Uh, that is not the number that I think is, um,
I described it, but $200 million of that number has been
recommitted straight into whanau, uh, sorry,
into Maori housing providers.
That's 200 million ounce at WA week of which the
is the first million.
Uh, so I think we just have to be careful about presenting,
um, those numbers and being very,
very accurate with those numbers.
Secondly, what's at the, uh, heart of what we're trying to,
uh, make sure of is those whanau, uh,
who have genuine housing need, uh,
and the right, um, house in the right place is deployed
and delivered for those whanau with genuine housing need.
And I think that ultimately we've made choices me,
I really respect
and celebrate the mahi that successful,
credible Maori housing providers have done.
And I've had the great chance to visit many of whom, uh,
were supported under the previous government, Tet Modio
and under this government mo.
Uh, and I continue to support now
that they've got the ability, I think, to access a, uh, a,
um, more agile fund through one doorway
that is an upside, and it's something that they ask for.
We still do have some pier
and are around papa,
and it was really pleasing, uh, for me to hear
that your father-in-law's brother got some support down at.
Thank you very much for that. Look after the relations.
Um, so just in summary, minister, you're saying bye Maori
for Maori still in place
By Maori For Maori,
but in a different context, is that what
You're saying? What I'm saying is
by Maori, for Maori,
I'm actually supportive of that, particularly
where it's credible Mm, by Maori for Maori for everyone.
I'm massively supportive of that
because I think that many
of the Maori housing providers can compete
with any random develop out there, including Kaing water.
Uh, and at our cost base within those Maori providers,
as you know, in many locations,
there's considerably less than Kaing water
because we don't have all the, the corporate, um, um,
cost base that goes with it, number one.
And number two, a lot
of the Maori housing providers use their own Fen
Maori, uh, to enable that.
And that comes at a different, um, cost
compared to other, uh, compared to other pieces of land.
And number three, and this is something that I just wanted
to acknowledge, um, remember, uh, hu
and Linden for when you have a development such as
that at Ka marae where you have old houses
that are spruced up under the repairs, you have new houses
that are built and the marae gets a revamp
of the whole septic arrangement.
In my view, that is a beautiful thing.
Okay, we'll move to, uh, Kushler.
Um, looking at ran transitional housing now
and the damage getting rid of that has had, um, recently,
uh, visited the Hua Maki in Nui
who have 34 ran on their books.
And for such a small community, that is a big number, um,
iii social services nearby are at capacity.
So number one, what are your medium term plans
to resolve that and what hope can you offer these
because is such a good name,
because when you've got a home,
you've got hope, you are set up for life.
But in the meantime, what immediate hope can you give
to these and relief to the services
who are trying to help them?
And what is your medium
and long-term plan to address this? Well,
I, I think, uh, ultimately, uh, there are a lot of ranta
for very serious housing deprivation.
Uh, some of that dislocation from their
and their whanau, uh,
some are in very tight, um, situations.
And of course the economy's, um, very, very challenged.
And that with the comments, uh, by earlier on,
around hope for young people.
The second thing is that, that trans, there are continue
to be youth, um, transitional
and supported accommodation places, uh,
throughout the whole housing portfolio.
But that's not the portfolio
or the rung funding, that's a different
No, but I was saying the name is good
because that's what housing provides you.
And these Ranga Tahi don't have that.
Yeah. But that, that is a different portfolio.
Uh, that's not through the rung funding that minister, uh,
mat Willie has described.
Uh, but I acknowledge that there are serious, uh,
housing deprivation with,
but it's not in the funding that's appropriated either
through or through the fund.
It's something that sits in the housing.
What's your view on it though?
Oh, I think my view is very clear.
There's serious housing deprivation with many, many, uh,
and we do have to work smarter
and quicker around, uh, a lot of those challenges.
Um, certainly I've had the fortunate privilege
of meeting people like Mahi Mahi
and others who are in this space
and doing it tough, a lot of the, doing it real tough.
Uh, and part of, I suppose my personal mantra is making sure
we have stronger whanau.
Um, but,
but I, I do wanna say too,
that whanau order should not be a proxy for trying to get in
and solve everyone's housing problems
because it's got its own responsibilities.
And we'll talk about those this afternoon.
Uh, so I don't disagree.
There's a lot of people, young people doing it.
I had a lot of people doing it hard.
That's my com comments around, uh, older wa Maori
as well, which I made earlier on.
Uh, we do need a better, cheaper way to build houses,
and that's why Minister Bishop at the macro level,
so geared towards going for housing growth, zoning
and consenting arrangements.
That's why I'm geared towards Papa
and having a national standard
and enabling 10 houses to be built on Maori land
as a permitted activity without
having to go to a resource consent.
I just need to make sure the Maori
land's on the same page as me.
In the same Waka, we are trying to do things, so many things
to make it easier to build houses.
So when we face up to the reality
that it's 50% more building house here compared
to Australia, that ain't good
because our wages aren't like Australia.
That is not good. And we have to also contend
with a whole bunch of other things like our land often being
in a different ground condition to Australia, that's rock.
This is swamp and ex bush.
So you've got all these situations
and the seismic laws, all these situations in New Zealand
that are making it harder to build homes.
And if and who and others,
and you all probably have been involved in building homes.
It takes forever and a day to get things done.
We just wanna make it easier to build homes
to accommodate our w uh,
and there are of course, concerns around the funding.
We're really geared around the regulatory,
and I think the public eye standard is
gonna be very good for our people.
Okay, Ana? Yeah, just a quick sub on, so recognizing, um,
some of the imp part-time
and, um, the opportunity through this new, uh, public K
standard that that could come into play.
Um, it's the flexible housing fund,
and is there going to be a dedicated Maori dollar within it
so that there's a, a knowledge within the Maori housing
sector by Maori for Maori?
This is by Maori for Maori, not by Maori, for everyone.
Um, is there, um, a proviso within that dollar
that we know there's a carve out of, um, pya
for B Maori for Maori?
There's no intention of carve out,
but what the intention is, is to have a, uh, tilting
or an inflection that recognizes the credible experiences
of, uh, of Maori organizations in developing housing, uh,
for our own whanau,
but importantly the disproportionate, uh, levels
of severe housing deprivation amongst Maori.
Whether or not that's the numbers in emergency, 60, 65,
sometimes 85% in some towns, like
or K order on the waiting list, 45 to 50% Maori.
And of course, those that are living in K order about
30 to 35%.
So, uh, there is no carve out
tag, but there's an absolute appreciation
that the disproportionate arrangements for Maori
and housing, look at our, the number of Maori
that own our own house, uh,
that's not an opinion, that's a fact.
And the fact is what I see, those Maori housing developers
that are very credible, uh,
in delivering homes got a bit of momentum.
Uh, and it's not just, you know, the,
the, or the to of the world.
There's actually a lot of Maori house builders like Leon de
Silver up on Wika or ma pu up in Auckland
that are doing a phenomenal job.
Uh, ultimately are we dealing
with the issues on the ground, uh, with whanau Maori
and others in need?
And it's clear to me there's a whole range of things
that aren't being dealt to in a, uh, expeditious manner.
Hence you've got Minister Bishop in the going
for housing growth and everything that goes with it.
Chris Pink, 250,000 products
that are gonna be credentialized any moment as well
as the infrastructure funding and financing, the consent
and arrangements, and ultimately are very, very clear, uh,
intention around identifying the right place
for the right home for those in general need.
And that's what I'm geared around.
And that's why you've seen, uh, me flying the flag,
not just in this building, but particularly in Hamilton
West, for those Maori kids
that have been living in dank motels
and getting 3000 kids out of motels. I'm very proud of it.
Yeah, just, um, on top of that minister, um, wanting
to follow through on f Maori in particular and how Maori,
because, um, TPK has been a great source
of support in that space.
Well, thank you so for the, you are welcome.
Um, but, but you've provided a, a suite of tools, right?
To UA Maori landowners and administrators.
So for Papa Kga purposes and housing aspirations for Maori
and, and AUA trusts, you know, that type of thing.
Um, is there an ability
or is there a space again, um, whether it's a carve out
or not, um, within that flexible housing fund for UA Maori,
because don't we want our land to be productive and,
and giving back to the people in their descendants,
But while there's no specific intention around a,
let's say, a tag for Maori funding within the flexible, uh,
for Maori housing, within the flexible fund,
there is funding for papa calling
and other related like repairs work
and whatnot that exists at 20 that exists
within the flexible fund.
No intention, but every intention to recognize
where the need is, which is disproportionately model,
and also the credibility of housing developers like, uh,
who have been doing some wonderful things on ground
addressing that need.
Yeah. And also a whole range of other challenges like,
you know, single mums with kids up in Gman,
which is the key focus for the development.
So I do think that, um, well, I, I don't think
that there's any polarization
of the debate within this cohort of, of Cordal.
Uh, and there is an absolute intention to make sure any, uh,
funding that's publicly public funding
is geared towards those with need disproportionately Maori
and in a context where we're trying to simplify,
not just building on land generally,
but particularly Maori land
because people want to use our, our UA
for legitimate purposes, reconnecting people to the ua,
but also also enabling jobs.
And when I see what Luana Shelf House
and others did up at Tofa Par recently
where they've got some horticulture
and they've moved some houses onto that site with the help
of, uh, a church group up in Tarau, I forget their name.
I look at that and say, that is marvelous.
You've got the marai over there,
you've got some horticulture here, now you've got housing.
What's that? That's, um, oh, ditto.
Or to two B seven D, which I was at on, uh, Sunday
with a building 93 homes, some affordable rentals, some,
uh, to be owned by whanau on their whanau trust land
adjacent to shops and job opportunities.
And around the corner from the marae where I go
and speak to the mans, the, that are living in those homes,
this is Sunday just gone about 12 o'clock
and say, how are you going?
They're like, we are absolutely loving this
because not only have we got an affordable rental,
we can actually go to our practice every other week
down at the, and they're reengaged and reconnected.
Now, there are some places in the country
that are way out in the proverbial, um, sticks,
beautiful places, like,
and I go up there and see what's going on.
I'm saying, well, that's a, that's a marvelous example
where Tonga can, the aspirations of the ground of the ho
and on the ground.
And I ideally love to see more of that, such as
what Nagi will going up there tomorrow are doing, uh, an
and hopefully at some stage where t and I have some bones
and places like we've got three members with question.
Sorry, that was a bit of longwinded description,
but as you, as you know, I'm really GED up about housing.
We can see that. Got it.
You're triggering me Mr.
Triggers great vision, great vision for coming. Okay, great.
So this is, I mean, in some ways you've already covered
this minister, but I just wanted
to give one more opportunity to speak about, uh,
Maori housing development in the, in the broader context of,
of the government's focus on, uh, on addressing
how housing needs across the sector.
So you touched before briefly on some of the things that,
for example, minister bishop, minister Pink, big on.
Are there, are there more things that you'd,
you'd speaking on that, that, that
actually relate to your responsibilities?
Well, ultimately, you,
I'm really motivated to make sure
that those wau need the many tens of thousands
of whanau Maori
and others actually in need,
get a chance for adequate housing.
We do have to review how the social allocation system
and other things operate within housing,
because you have quite unusual situations.
I'll give you a great example.
Si similar whanau living in the same place.
One's, um, in social housing might be calling order a chip,
and they pay 120 bucks a week.
And someone who hasn't had that opportunity isn't, um,
you know, um, gone through the system and been selected.
They're paying $480 a week,
but they're in the same economic situation.
And we find that to be quite unusual
and something that we actually have
to look at across government.
We, we we're basically pumping out five, four
and a half, $5 billion in accommodation
subsidy every single year.
That's, that's not CapEx, that's just a sub.
That's what's happened in the last few years.
And I think we, we step back
and say, how can we do this better so we can get more houses
that are, that are adequate houses built, particularly
by the private sector, because most houses built in this
country, 90% of homes built by private sector.
So creating the conditions to enable more houses to be built
by the private sector as well as places like chips and,
and Maori housing providers, that's absolutely the case.
Now, you can only do that with the appropriate bulk
and main's connections,
unless you're of course out at a place like
where you can manage the septics
and everything else at a localized level.
That works in some places, not in all, um,
especially works adjacent to Mariah.
'cause often you've got septics there
that can, can, can accommodate.
Yeah. So for us, making sure that the environment
or privates to build houses is, is flexible
and empowering enough is right top of mind.
We've got a social, um, um, system, social
appropriations around housing.
We need to make that work effectively
and get the right house for the right, um, location
for people in genuine need. That's where we're at.
I've gotta stop on that. Oh, yes. Very
Quickly.
So we all agree you've failed miserably in the housing area.
Can I just ask you, I don't agree how you don't agree. Okay.
Okay. Alright. Well, one person doesn't agree, um, in terms
of, see, I just wanna go back to the numbers
because you talked about the 200 million.
See 200 million is a lot less than $1 billion.
So, so, so what we're saying is, well, you know, it's not,
what you're saying is not all bad, uh,
because, uh, um, there's 200 million,
but that's a far cry from what we talked about when we said,
and so basically it's by for Maori now, isn't it?
It's not by Maori. What's a great question,
but that's a question is how do you,
how do you thank you for that.
How do you, how do you conclude that 200 million
does the business when previously we were looking at a
$1 billion?
Well, that just suggests to me you failed miserably.
Ultimately, I reject that opinion.
Presents it as a question.
Uh, because what has happened is that, uh,
the commitment over filed, a lot of
that was consumed in the thousand homes, uh, through, uh,
the labor led governments
and the thousand homes that have been approved in 18 months.
By the way, we didn't take five years, uh, in 18 months,
but through this government and those homes are on the go,
some have been delivered and some are yet to be delivered.
And actually the capacity of Maori housing developers
to deliver, um, massively is evolving.
It's evolving, uh, in beautiful places that we've been to.
Second thing is that I think you've assumed
or presumed, uh, where the funding has been reallocated
and pitching it at a level that actually Maori are not going
to benefit from the protection of cost pressures
around transitional housing first and other finance.
And I recruit that, um, presumption.
I think that's a very rich presumption to make
that is not underpinned by accurate facts.
I I think ultimately we have to be very, very careful
to assume that because that funding has been reprioritized
or reallocated, it's not helping Ana Maori.
I don't agree with that. I'm disappointed
about that most Sure.
You are time. Last
Question, pr um,
so I heard you caught it all yesterday about Papa KAA
and the social services, uh, hearing, you know,
there's great things around Papa Kaa for our whanau,
but there's one problem and that whanau have identified is
that they're struggling with the finance Yes.
To be able to achieve, you know, uh,
putting homes on our own ua.
How is the department gonna help our wau achieve this?
Well, I think first couple of things is that, um,
there continues to be some small amounts
of Pia available at ko Papa
and I mentioned, um, Willie's uncle in law earlier on,
and that's called, uh, that's the first thing.
The second thing is that the role
of clinic property is not necessarily to fund everything.
It's actually to monitor, uh, the adequacy of the services,
uh, deployed by and delivered by agencies such as mub.
And my expectation is, uh, Dave
and the team will continue to not only monitor that,
but report on how it can be done better.
Uh, and we've seen some
and had some wonderful examples,
particularly over the last five
or 10 years about how, uh, Maori housing development,
whether or not it's Papa Kaga
or something more, we call it urbanized,
but it's nice way to describe it, urbanized
and big towns in cities in New Zealand,
how those things can be done better.
Now, there are some great examples in the urban space like,
uh, Andrea and Una
or Kit Rifle Range Road accommodating basically elderly, uh,
comar, they turned a, uh, bowling club into a Komar village.
Absolutely fantastic. Okay.
How can we make those examples
or enable those examples to be replicated in other places?
Absolutely. Uh, if the viewers,
the government and ultimately the taxpayer should
a hundred percent fund or Papa KAA projects
and applications that are presented to, I think
that would be a very, very challenging proposition.
Uh, not just because, um, uh, of the financial costs,
but also the capability to deploy in a whole range
of areas including, uh, you know, far, far away.
So think one of the issues that we do face
and which has been the subject of the finance
and expenditure committee interrogation,
is the way the banks have supported or otherwise.
Um, the de deployment of whanau housing across fwa Maori.
Some of that has been tuned up, so it offered to two B
and seven D the other day, even though it's Eno Maori
and Whanau building houses, which they will own on top
of their whanau trust land.
The banks have actually come to the party, it's West Bank
and maybe a Z was definitely West Bank.
That's good, uh, to give better lending
into Maori housing space, even though the land is owned
by Whanau Trust or in corporations
and trusts the pressure
that Minister Willis has put on the banks.
Actually, to be a little bit mindful
around our whole range initiatives, including lending,
I think is very useful.
And the Finance and Expenditure Committee is
anyone from that committee?
Is anyone on that committee here? No.
Uh, part of the, uh, ma Yeah.
Part of the mahi that they were undertaking was to look at
how lending on Maori land can work better
and if there needs to be their relevant communications
to the banks around making sure that that is equitable
for want of a better term, is important
because the Reserve Bank
and others found that the difference in mortgage
and interest costs when that was, uh,
securitized against Maori land
or Maori projects was actually material or that ain't cool.
You know, it's, it sort of feels like
because we're Maori, we've got a higher interest rate.
That's how it sort of feels a lot of au So that work in
that space, I think can also have a market effect.
The other thing that I think is useful to understand is
the community housing providers, uh, have bigger, uh,
quite a degree of support over the last six months,
particularly around the expediting
of the operating supplement more upfront, uh, the, um,
community housing funding agency being established alongside
people like Sam Stubbs from Simplicity, uh,
and some other arrangements that have made it easier, uh,
for community housing providers to actually deploy, um,
deploy and build more houses on Maori land or general land.
My expectation and hope I suppose, is
that community housing providers, whether
or not they're like TA Moway, uh, or Salvation Army
or anyone else actually get more enthusiastic
around deploying some of their skills, talents,
and capabilities alongside Maori housing
developers in our Maori land.
Just a very quick comment from before we move
Yes. Minister, as you've
raised the, um, gain capital,
not just personally like on Freehold Maori land,
but even a trusts
and individuals who can afford
to service loans are finding it hard to access them.
Yeah. So the comment is please do throw your weight
and influence behind making those changes in the inquiry.
Thank you. I'm only 85 kgs, but I'll try off.
Okay. Let's move now on to the funding
of Maori broadcasting
Before we, before we, um, yeah.
Leave, because Steve's, this is Steve k Steve is at the, um,
uh, foundation of a lot the around papa
and I think it'll be useful because he is here
and hasn't spoken yet, just to spend a couple
of minutes describing what the standard's all about
or what's gonna be proposed
consultation on the standard, Steve.
Okay. What you gonna
Thanks, minister. I'll
try and be quick. Thank you.
Um, so I guess the genesis of this was, uh,
c come outta a, the understanding
that especially our regional Kama, he, um, developed through
TKs role funding over the years, going back 10 years or so
and seeing that there are, um, multiple barriers
to developing housing from Maori.
Um, one of which, uh, is, uh,
resource consenting from district council.
So, um, the, uh, we looked into that in some depth, kind
of reviewing provisions across district plans
nationally in the current state.
And then the opportunity arose
through the resource management reforms
that are happening currently to, um,
to develop a national environmental standard.
So a national kind of, uh, piece of secondary legislation
to enable Papa Kga without a a, uh, so
that's under consult consultation at the moment.
Um, and, um, there's a lot of support out there for it.
Um, but we need to get the details right.
Um, and
I mean, I can talk to the detail of people
who have questions, but I think
that probably gives you a bit of background.
Yeah. Well, So, so the, um,
original idea of moving Papa K in with, uh, you know,
mainstream providers, uh, you know, with HUD
and all that, how do you think
that's gone and Will will that?
Yeah, will that continue?
I'm not sure I can speak to that.
I mean, I'm just talking about the, this kind of change
to the resource management system.
Mm. Um, it's
Because Dave, you, Dave, you know all about that.
It was about giving some assistance to
that papa strategy, right.
Not leaving Papa Kanga on its own.
I can tell you what we do. Yeah.
Which is Papa Kaga,
and that's what that 34 point a half million is for.
Yeah. And it is around Papa Kaga.
It's about repairs, but also Kaga sorted.
I think that's the question you had asked about, you know,
what support are we giving?
I can't talk to what HUD is deaf.
Yeah, no. 'cause 'cause working
with HUD would obviously assist that,
but that was the original idea, wasn't it?
And, and, and it took us to a place Yeah.
Where we built the capability within HUD Yeah.
To be able to work with those, uh,
community providers like Toy two title.
Yeah. Um, but they, they now have that ability.
Mm-hmm. Okay. Let's now move on to our broadcast.
Thank you very much, Steve. Thank you.
Uh, broadcasting and, and language entities.
Um, we, we've got, uh,
broadcast next here, so we'll go straight with one.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Of course.
We are heavy hitters on this side.
Um, I wanted to really understand, minister,
where are we heading in terms of
Maori strategy?
You know, funding, uh, we see the stripping back, of course,
we've got, you know, the funding cliff
that FTA Maori is suffering right now.
We know that you've, um, completed a bit of a review.
So what are, what's the vision?
What's the vision of, um, next steps to honor Y 11,
uh, and our koha as the government to Rio Maori?
Well, first and foremost, I'm absolutely, uh, invested in
and committed to, to Maori, uh, being actively part protect,
uh, but as a, uh, part of the DNA
of the country, that's the first thing.
The second thing is you'll be well aware of, uh, why Leban,
as you mentioned, but also the efforts over many years
by people like Morris Williams National, uh, former here
of the National Party and Minister, to ensure
that the Maori broadcasting
and initiatives around to do Maori, uh, pursued about.
Third thing is that yes, there are, uh, funding cliffs
and time limited funding, of course, uh,
initiated under a previous government, uh,
that will come off and will, uh, reduce the total amount
of funding, uh, that is allocated
or appropriated to different Maori language entities.
Uh, and that was time limited.
People had a choice to baseline it,
but no, it was time limited.
And some of it, um, of course, uh, was utilized
to do things like build facilities
and other, um, and other activities.
But, um, we're also mindful, uh,
that there are, uh, different roles
and different responsibilities across the different mining
language entities that are supported for
and paid for by, uh, uh, the taxpayer
and by some other revenue streams as well for entities
for $139 million.
Uh, and ultimately the baseline is around 110 to 115.
Uh, so we do think that Maori broadcasting plays a hugely,
uh, critical role in revitalizing, uh, to Maori.
Uh, but, uh,
notwithstanding the significant pressures on me
as the Minister of Maori developments
and a variety of other portfolios, uh, to reduce the funding
for Maori language entities, the funding, uh,
of the baseline continues,
and I'm actually pretty, I'm comfortable with that.
Am I happy, uh, that over time, uh, the funding is reducing
'cause of time, limited arrangements, not entirely enthused?
Uh, do I think that we can do things, uh, better
or use the levers that are available to us as ministers
and as, um, members of parliament to better optimize
the delivery of Mahi and ma Maori goals?
Whether or not that's
absolutely, hence why we've engaged the specialist advisory
group to get their views
that I don't find reports actually come to me, not on that,
uh, yet to be, um, yet to be, uh, uh, received.
But the media sector is guided by Hmm.
And those, what I am actually really motivated by is that
the private sector and many of the general public, uh,
are absolutely motivated and inspired by
and utilized to do Al Maori.
So I don't know what her name is, the two,
the one news presenter, um, geez, it was awesome
with the use of todo Maori every night at six o'clock.
And a lot of that has come out of, uh,
multiple government commitments over many years to support
entities in place and also promotional todo.
So do I have a specific intention
for the Maori broadcasting sector?
I think they're guided by the Mahi Corona
and Ma Maori that within,
I I just wanted to follow up on workforce losses.
Um, and considering what we have lost out of AKA Maori
and some of the K Mahi had been long serving, uh, you know,
20 odd years, um, within the sector, skilled expertise
and how we as Maori, you know,
it's a limited pool of talent.
Um, and where do we retain our coma here
as we lose them with this time?
Limited funding. Is there a workforce development strategy
that the Crown is leading out, um, to both develop
but also retain and provide progression as well?
I'm, I'm not saying that all
of our ka mahi should stay in Maori media.
Uh, it can move to, you know, tataki or elsewhere.
Um, there's opportunities everywhere,
but how do we, uh,
develop this workforce when we are losing some of them,
and I don't know where they're going.
Does anybody know where those have gone?
I do. Well, kho close,
that's a question for close.
Um, but, uh, or is it prison?
Uh, so is not responsible
for the workforce development within those,
uh, within those entities.
And some of 'em are independent, um,
statutory entities the last time I looked,
and the minister are not responsible for that.
I think if the suggestion is you give them money,
therefore you must dictate the HR plan
or the workforce plan for those entities.
So I think that's, it's
Rather strategy. It's
it's multi media strategy.
Well, and workforce.
I don't think that ultimately the government is trying
to force a Maori media strategy.
I don't think that's the role of these
fine people or myself.
We can encourage it, and
that's why we have those discussions with Tamay
and Maori.
The, uh, council, uh, I don't see, uh, form,
uh, compared to ourselves.
Uh, but those matters are really, um,
addressed it in an individual entity level. Or,
And I can I just have
A little point of order here, point of order, you
Know, if that's Mr.
Chair. The, the, the,
I think the officials all know we did actually put in a
Maori media strategy.
Well, yeah, Yeah. You,
You're talking about a workforce strategy.
You're talking about workforce, but we do have a
official Maori media strategy that was, that I ever saw
that was worked on by TPK and officials and everyone else.
So there is a Maori iMedia strategy in place
might pay for you to read it.
So as our Speaker will
say, that's not a point of order. But
Anyway, we're taking that point.
That's, but I think that's, that's adjacent
to the question of the government's Maori media
workforce strategy.
What is it? And, um, how are you managing or controlling it?
And I'm like, well, I don't know if that's really
ultimately the responsibility of Dave Samuels
as a secretary of Maori development.
Absolutely. Paula. Paula might have a view though on that,
which I'm happy to defer to because
I, I asked about vision.
I asked about, you know, where are we heading?
And then I just raised, you know, the grassroots impact
of a lack of funding losers workforce.
So is there, um, from the strategy which we know, exist.
Um, how, how are we, how are we doing? How are we tracking?
But here, okay. We've got four CEOs,
four boards Okay.
And some other boards too that have, uh,
Al Maori at the heart of them, like to, to me.
Yep. Uh, and it's dealing with a very small
allocation, appropriation of funding.
What we will need to do,
and what we have been doing is engage in a specialist
advisor group led by Pioneer.
Great. To ensure
that we better optimize the levers that we do have.
If it is a lolly scramble, our Bundy type politics.
I'm not into that. I'm really not.
Uh, and, uh, if anyone wants me to be sorry,
that's not my responsibility.
That's why when you, um, intimate that maybe I should have,
or this group should have a Maori workforce strategy
for the Maori media, uh, you still sit back
and say, who's best to determine, uh,
how the workforce has developed the minister or Dave
or the CEOs of those entities.
And I think that I lean more towards the
latter than the former.
Uh, that's, that's where I come from. But, um, Mr. Chair.
Yeah. Can I ask, um, Paula
to please make a comment about that?
Um,
Um, so Mr. Jackson is correct
that there was an investment made, um, uh, in which, uh,
in the MA media, um, sector strategy and workforce
and network didn't proceed, um, when the Maori entity, um,
work ceased as well in 2023.
Um, but I think what minister, um, has since done
is focused on improving, um, the legislative settings.
And that goes to the specialist advisory group with regards
to Maori broadly, so
Maori and how does, um,
through Maori development maximize the opportunities,
which includes the Maori language entities, the four, um,
uh, sorry, the, the three BA Maori,
and along with, um, awa,
but also includes more broadly the investment
that government makes, uh, in and through to Maori.
So that's the, that's the repositioning
that have happened in terms of strategy.
Takata, have you got a sub to this,
or you got a new line of question?
'cause we are sub just, can I just up on this minister.
So what, and can I ask the officials, is there a drive now
to reduce the Maori language entities?
Uh, if so, I would be very, um, worried about
that given the expertise on, for example, uh, where we have,
uh, uh, expert, uh, uh, not just Mato real people,
but people who know about, uh, strategies
with regards to the real.
Uh, we put our first, um, uh, pake on Leah, Jennifer Ward,
Leland, first Pake woman, uh, person for many years to try
and broaden the strategy in terms of Tori.
And so I'm really proud of the work they're doing.
I'm just want to ask you, minister, you've got to,
you've got, you've got, are,
are you saying today you're going
to reduce the Maori language entities?
Is that, is that on your table?
If so, that would be very worrying for, for
for many people out there given the different
roles of these entities.
Can I have a response on that? Please, please,
Yes, absolutely. What
I am saying is there's every intention to figure out
how to optimize the levers that are available to me
as the Minister for Maori development to ensure
that the goals, particularly
around intergenerational transmission of ta Maori
and high levels of fluency within Del
with Del Maori are actually achieved.
Uh, now they're coming back, uh,
after looking at those levers, uh, of course with to, to,
and fta, and they will report back.
And I'll take advice from that.
Uh, but, uh, I don't, I don't think that the, uh,
that the, well, I'll put it in a, in a different way.
We have to look at the levers that are available to us,
and that's the intention specialist advisory group
to come back with some views.
I dunno what their ultimate recommendations are gonna be,
but that's why we bring in experts, um,
to give us those features.
It wouldn't be just about saving money again,
would it say save funding,
Chuck all the Maori stuff in one entity
and just get rid of the
last 'cause That's the problem, isn't it?
It's the rationalization, uh, strategy, which is not just
what you've been, you know, put in front
of Maori media some years ago.
But the last time I looked at the, um, objectives
of the Mahi and mahi Maori rationalization
of the finances not, was not one of those objectives.
There does have to be value for money. Absolutely.
Uh, but the last time I looked at those objectives,
it did not say, said no.
I was just, and so my intention
and, you know, uh, as much as, as, as, uh, others
around this room is
to not only make sure we optimize the LE levers,
but also to showcase
and role model what it means
to be a bilingual person in this precinct.
Uh, and with that, I'm happy to,
um, continue the line of questions.
Okay. Just before we come to you,
Koto got one more sub here from
Rema, well, Sub supplementary, um, notwithstanding
for the, all the, um, fantastical presumptions being made
around, um, the table.
So you touched upon,
and if you can please, um, just elaborate a bit more about
what your priorities are for today on Maori
Minister. Well, absolutely.
Uh, you know, our in, in the terms
of the broadcasting space, supporting the revitalization of
Al Maori is almost, uh,
and making sure that we are guided by very clear,
transparent objectives
and KPIs that go with those objectives.
Now, at the moment, that's pretty clear, you know, like
of 85% of New Zealand is value Maori.
It's great objective and a KPI that goes with objective
and making sure that people know about that.
One of the things we need to do, of course, is acknowledge
that the majority of the funding for Maori within
government is not in the broadcasting entities.
It's actually within education now, hundreds of millions
of dollars to total Maori language as a medium of education.
Absolutely fantastic. And you heard, uh,
minister Stanford in the last couple of weeks, uh,
committing to various, um, funding streams to Toto
and a couple of other initiatives.
Toto. Um, we need to convene to do noil, which is part
and parcel of, uh, the Maori order
because I know as does, uh,
and others here that it's
through leveraging across agencies,
we're gonna get a better appreciation
and ultimately expression
of Al Maori in the little universe that we call God's own.
Uh, so convening that is probably one of the next steps
after we receive the specialist advisory report back.
And the refreshing from Mahi, um, will, will to fold out
of that, which is where,
where you get the measures and the targets.
And the Mahi is specifically designed
to encapsulate all public service agencies.
So that's where, to the point that minister has made, um,
that's where you ought, that's where you ought
to get the accountability as well
as the monitoring and the mentoring.
So highlighting the good things that agencies are doing
and learning from one another in that respect as well.
We've had the chance too, just, um, in passing in on
recognize the time we're nearly at be witching now, uh,
that, uh, we have made some new appointments, the mining,
uh, language entities outside to, uh, I think that, um,
we've got a, a really evolving skill base
and capabilities set, uh, within those, uh, entities.
Uh, but the specialist advisory group
that's not reviewing the entities,
that's reviewing the levers that we've got available to us
to optimize the delivery of these objectives.
And of course, meeting the KPIs. Okay.
I just wanna acknowledge, um,
aka Maori in their social impact report that they released,
um, two months ago now, that report, um, state was noted
that they doubled their deliverables, uh,
in their current funding.
So I guess what I wanna ask my partai is,
is there any new money for
No, no, there's no new money, uh, for them.
Uh, we're maintaining the track of funding, uh, that was
committed to by the previous government.
Uh, and I think we're very, um, uh, determined
to keep on maintaining that track in the event that we are
to achieve some more, uh, poutier injection.
That would be wonderful, and I'll advocate for that.
And I just wanted to mention, uh, again, that, uh,
the release of that report was useful
because it does reinforce that
Al Maori, our culture, uh, can be foundations, uh, for,
uh, regeneration and success as a country, uh,
and as whanau, and whilst there are a number
of unusual comments made about the Minister
of Maori development not being there that day, I'm very, uh,
uh, appreciative of the mahi that's of the board, uh,
and the, that Maori are doing to maintain
and inject to Maori into our everyday media lives.
So on that, there's no new money,
but no reduction in the current,
No new money, no reduction from the baseline.
The baseline continues.
There was some time limited funding, uh,
and that will reduce as was, uh, uh, previously committed.
Okay. Is that Steve? That is for your minister. Thank you.
So from, uh, from Kisha? Yes.
Can I, um, part
of the fallout from the Maori has been
increased pressure on the region.
Uh, well, the job losses has been
increased pressure on the regions.
You like the collective
to provide content.
Ah, are there any plans to increase investment
in regional, regional programming
to keep our wana connected with what's going on in p
Maori? Okay, so the
first comments I make is just, um, uh, uh,
a reset of how I see the reduction of funding.
I don't see that as cuts.
There was time limited funding, so I don't see this cuts.
I know others do. I don't.
Uh, the second thing is that the allocation
of funding across Maori radio, Irid, Maori,
and other, um, media is often, um,
uh, determined at the tamma Pahu end, uh,
rather than the ministerial
or, so it's ang have their own
assistant, uh, arrangements
and they use a model, it's called Copper, uh, uh,
to make, uh, allocations across different,
um, recipients.
Right. And, uh, that's an operational
matter that I stay out of.
Uh, but I'm really enthused, uh, by a range of,
I'll call 'em new providers,
but innovative, uh, providers
of Maori broadcasting services like, um, koha
and pka and others.
I think in response to, uh, Han's comments earlier on, uh,
there's some organic development
of Maori workforce in the media space,
and also others that actually have a lot less to do
with the Maori broadcasting funding,
but seem to have a massive following, whether
or not it's the, with 47 million views
or young people like who are doing some phenomenal stuff
and promoting to Al Maori.
Um, although his, um, Facebook post
and gumbo, um, uh, were, were quite, uh, provocative,
might see them tomorrow with the red bands.
So, Willie, you got a a question?
I've got a few questions. Go for it. Um, so well, okay.
So you, you didn't, you're saying you,
there's no extra funding.
You didn't advocate for any more funding
for Maori broadcasting?
I didn't say that. Oh, right. You did the second, so
You did add second, but No, no, that's
The, so, so can you confirm if you did
put roots into my mouth?
Could you, could you confirm if you did advocate for
Ma? Uh, you know, I
advocate for a lot of, uh, Copa right.
Funding Kopa Maori, is what
I'm saying. Right? That's all
you'll, that's as far as you'll go
because, um, as, as Paula, um, confirmed, we did a lot
of work three years, three years, 20, 22,
I think we finished that Maori media plan.
And so given that, I think in the plan minister, uh,
there is a lot for you that you would probably agree with.
Will you look at taking up that, uh, uh,
plan going forward given the constraints
that you have at the moment in terms of, of funding?
Can I ask, uh, a couple of other, uh,
questions just while we're on it?
A lot of worries about, uh, Maori, uh, Maori.
Maori f Maori has got a lot of worries at the moment.
There was a view in terms of privatization.
Can you, can you, can you, uh, confirm that that is
absolutely not on the, on, on the books,
because that's, uh, uh, uh, that has come through.
And then on top of that,
and I, I'm sorry to keep coming back to this,
but you are going have a deputy prime minister who attacked,
uh, one of our most senior journalists, uh, uh, m
Forbes, uh, and, and calling her a nutter
and calling her, uh, oh, no, you, I'm not making this up.
Uh, calling her a conspiracy theorist, probably our,
our most decorated, uh, Maori, uh,
broadcaster in recent years.
Um, how does, again, uh, her,
his undue influence, uh, in terms
of Maori development is just so, so prevalent.
Have you, did you deal with that too?
Because again, he said he was clear, you Maori,
you're not gonna get an extra cent absolutely clear
and, uh, uh, attacks our most senior Maori journalists.
Have you been able to traverse that with them, given again,
he said Maori funding is racist?
So I think there are three questions.
Yeah, about three question in there, and there might be six
comments, but, uh, first one is Maori media plan.
I'm happy to reread that and, uh, see whether
or not there are some credible aspects in the plan
that can be, uh, curated, uh, in the current environment,
whether or not that's fiscal or regulatory number,
number two, prioritization of ka Maori.
Just have heard of it. Uh,
but if you are intending for
to buy it for Ka Maori, let me know.
Uh, I know that happened with my, uh, you know, there were,
uh, trouble owners of my f fm and,
and it went through a bit of a process.
Uh, but it's the first I've heard of it.
Uh, I haven't heard of it before.
I stepped into this room and spent quality
time, uh, with you.
Mm-hmm. So, yeah, is how I describe my response to that.
The third thing, uh, in terms of an attack on me,
Forbes, that's, uh, first I've heard of it, and it's not
because I'm not interested in
what me and others have to say.
There's such, um, uh, a high level
of content, uh, in the media way.
It's whether or not it's Maori media
or mainstream media, uh, with, uh, Maori media experts
and Maori broadcasters that I don't get to watch everything.
Uh, and, uh, I don't get to watch a lot of TV at all,
but I do listen to 95.4, uh,
radio autonomy on a regular basis.
Te or, uh, so comments around someone being a nutter
or conspiracy theorist first I've heard of it. Ha.
Have a look at it, minister. Yeah. Um,
can I ask you, are you working in, and,
And I, I don't subscribe to that sort of, um, no,
I don't, I know Behavior or tikanga,
it's not my way of doing things.
What I'm really focused on is staying positive around
credible, uh, investigative reporting that is not based on,
uh, surmising and speculation, uh,
which can happen all over the place.
Just quick sub to the Honorable Jackson's, um,
commentary there, um, minister aka, do you have a brain
of your own and,
and do you like to use your own brain or say, say
Brand or brain? Brain?
I've got both. Yeah. Blast on my, uh, yes.
So, so you have your own brain, which you used
to make your own decisions and ask someone else's one.
Absolutely. Thanks. That
one's the one's the worst question of the day award.
Okay. So want another stupid question? Just ask that.
Can I, um, can I, um, just, uh, in terms
of Minister Goldsmith, is there a sort of coordination,
coherent sort of strategy there, minister?
Because, uh, I'm, I'm talking Maori broadcasting
and general broadcasting.
Is there a, a, um, is Minister Goldsmith working?
Does, do you work in tandem with him
because, uh, you know that the, we know
how bad it is in terms of media at the moment,
so many people outta jobs.
Is, is there a coherent, coordinated strategy going on there
with Maori broadcasting and mainstream broadcasting?
I do not have deeper meaningfuls
with Minister Koda around this issue.
Uh, what I can observe is that, uh, Maori, um, media,
Maori broadcasting
and Maori comms is not just about information sharing.
It's about the reinvigoration
of our culture and communities.
And that's what I to
Okay.
Any
Other questions? Thank
You. That sounds a lot of
people getting angry.
Just, just, just, just a couple more, uh, uh, your,
your relationship with FTA Maori now
minister, uh, going forward.
You, you, you heard the different comments from
that social investment, uh, uh, uh, meeting that you missed.
We certainly weren't from me,
but, uh, there was, uh, uh, you can see that they're looking
for other ways in terms of investment, uh, going forward.
Uh, they have certainly a lot
of hopes pinned on you in terms of your advocacy,
which you assured us today.
Uh, what, what are what?
And, and, and you, we,
when you talked earlier about a car, I concur with you.
I I do actually agree
that funding should have been baselined.
That is certainly the challenge for, for ministers in terms
of Maori development and Maori funding.
So no disagreement with me,
but they want to be optimistic in terms of going, they,
they want some optimism
and support from you as a minister going forward.
Is it a dual strategy in terms of crown funding coming in?
Or are you pushing for a strategy in terms
of getting iwi investment, business investment?
What's, what's, what's the projection going forward?
Well, you know, ultimately the, the, the fundamental
underpinning, uh, for Maori,
which was announced on the first day, uh, with niwa
and, uh, Julian, my good friend Julian Muto
in endures, uh, how that's funded, uh, I think is
where the, um, flavor of the questioning has been.
You know, we committed to supporting
AKA Maori on the track that it's on.
In the event that we can advocate
and secure more Toal, that would be fantastic.
But I also acknowledge
that Akata Maori is become a lot more agile,
not just in the TV space,
but in the social media and media space.
And it's not just a television, television station,
never was just a station, uh,
but is, um, far more, I think, uh, agile
and, uh, adept at confronting, uh, the current environment.
So the mahi that was undertaken previously, which didn't,
you know, go through the public broadcasting mahi
that you were leading didn't go through,
but ultimately, um, the, um, uh, the, uh,
the driver for Maori TV to be more connected in a real hub
for, uh, media is something that I endorse.
If we can do that in a credible way that attracts
not just government investment,
but third party investment, iwi investment, um,
corporate investment, and others have always had a
challenge, I think, with a lot of media
around advertising and advertising revenue.
Uh, but if, if that materializes cup high mm, awesome.
They, they still continue to have a lot of international,
um, engagement, uh,
with indigenous channels throughout the world.
And I think that they've learned a few things from
relationship in that work in that area, but,
but ultimately generating content
that appeals to various different audiences
and is able to sustain is the challenge that they,
and a lot of other organizations are in. I,
I suppose, minister, it's, if you have an organization
that staff, staff of cash going, appreciate how hard it is,
people are always ask, well, how,
how long is the Crown going to be funding this?
Right? Yeah. You, you, you get this as the minister. Sure.
You have mainstream was funded from 1960, from 1960.
Maori TV came around in 2004.
So, so there's a lot of time to make up.
And I, and I'm asking these questions
because it's huge worry in the, in the community about, um,
the place being starved off funds.
So the, the, the privatized ancient questions, not out
of the ordinary, because they'll,
they'll be a negative cash flow by 27 if they, um,
if they don't get any more money.
And, and it falls back.
And, and I know some people think, oh, this is outrageous.
But there's another agenda with,
I'm not saying it's your agenda, but there's another agenda
within the coalition government,
and that's why the warriors, that, uh,
that agenda will come through.
And that's a privatization agenda. Minister,
I, I, I've not heard of de an agenda to defund
or privatize for KA Maori.
I've not heard of that. Um, if there is,
I'm not saying it's from you, if there is a credible
and legitimate source for that, um, observation,
I'm maybe to receive that.
But my focus is to continue to support, uh, the board, uh,
and management team of KA Maori to undertake the job, uh,
and the responsibilities, uh, that they have.
And ultimately, uh, to continue to be agile
and adapt, adapt, uh, to the changing media environment,
which isn't just driven by the government.
It's actually driven by audience, um,
appreciation and preferences.
Now, we know when we look at, let's say
the, the coverage of tema, there is
absolute international, global as well as domestic
and national, uh, appreciation
and applause for KO Maori initiatives,
like 47 million views.
Yeah. Of te I just think about that
and all hail, multiple Templeton
and t others
who picked up some awards last Thursday night at tam, uh,
and the mahi that they've learned.
I, I just look at that and think, man,
that is absolutely amazing.
It actually reinforces what most
of us in this room are committed to, which is Del Maori
as part of the DNA and identity foundation, this country.
And anyone who's trying to privatize that or dismiss that
or make out that, that it's not realistic,
I think is adjacent to the truth, is.
Okay. We're gonna take one last question from Steve
before we move to the next slide. There we go.
Thank you, Mr. Um, thanks Steve.
Mr. You'd agree that we get extraordinary value
for money from investment in Maori broadcasting
as compared to mainstream.
And why, therefore, given
how small the relative budgets are, are we seeing these cuts
to that?
Well, again, uh, I think to echo the sentiments
of the honorable much lower, uh, formerly, uh, bully is
that there has been a disproportionality of the per hour,
um, funding for real model initiatives compared
to the mainstream over many, many years.
And I think we can acknowledge that, uh,
anyone else has got a different fact.
Let me know. Uh, the second thing,
and I mentioned this earlier on, uh, whilst you slipped out
to those other meetings, is that I do not think,
and I don't categorize the reduction
in funding being a cut, it was time limited
and it was not baselined.
We have maintained a funding track
that was baselined under the previous government.
Now, I have been challenged today,
and I welcome those challenges around, um, advocating harder
and seeking more funding for Maori broadcast
and Maori initiatives generally.
And I, you know, I, I, um, have received that
and received that challenges.
I, um, uh, previously in the house
and, uh, at other select committee meetings, uh,
we've all had to take, uh, like a haircut, uh,
across a variety of agencies except defense,
police, health and education.
There might be one other. Uh,
and I think I continue to have great pride in being able
to retain the baseline track for Maori language initiatives.
Other people think it's going backwards.
Uh, I think preserving the funding for those, uh,
Maori language entities is a good thing.
Would I like more and everyone like more? Yes.
So long as it's value for money.
Okay. Thank you, Steve. Thank you, Mr. Right.
We're gonna move on to the next item,
which is the other development initiative funding.
Uh, Willy, do you ever say, yeah, I
Suppose the, the big question there, minister is, um,
are we in our, in our organizations are asking the question,
are we looking at, uh, further cuts?
Uh, uh, uh, any, because obviously the government's looking
for reduced, uh, uh, to reduce in different areas.
Uh, and, and, and,
and another question, particularly given the,
what's happening in terms of natural disasters, is there,
uh, where's the pier in terms of funding, uh, in that area?
Because, uh, here we have this cost of living, uh, crisis.
Is that a, that a fund that is, is there an open fund there
that you could, that Maori can access?
Huge questions coming from the areas that you, you know,
you know, uh, areas, the, the other, other areas.
Is there a, a, a open that Maori can access in terms
of natural disasters?
I thought I gave that question to, um, uh,
members on the left hand side,
but now that you've asked it, uh, recently,
we had the great opportunity to announce some
of the funding, uh, from the, uh, f Maori
funding pathway as a result of cycling Gabrielle.
Uh, and there's considerable funding available
to help those marae
and UA Maori, uh, blocks
who were effectively in category three, uh,
and five marae on the East Coast, right in the hearts of
where Bushland and Danna, uh, are representing the people,
uh, have been supported to relocate their marae, uh,
away from the floodplains, away from the zone, uh,
and definitely away from any streams that might, uh,
overflow in the chance of event of a storm.
Uh, and there continues to be, are available for those, uh,
Mara and F Maori blocks
that are categorized in category three, uh, through
that funding pathway.
And you might recall it was established under labor
and was actually extended in, in en Largent in budget 24,
when I was really, you know, stoked to be able to go up, uh,
on the same day as the announced, uh, to announce that
that pathway had been provided.
And that's gonna generate a lot of activity, a lot of, uh,
not just by the Ana on the ground, but also Master Cals
and others who might be engaged in deployment.
And the second thing is that, uh, we do have a lot of, uh,
climate and environment exposed
communities, not just in the rural areas, either.
Like you go out West Auckland.
What happened in the Auckland anniversary flips?
That was, and actually we tug tires down in South Auckland.
That was diabolical, very, very sad.
It affected a lot of Maori, uh, up
and down, uh, the Tamaki Isus.
Uh, so, uh, there continues to be, uh, um,
um, operating allowance for those types
of emergency situations, uh, that pop out from time tot.
And we live in a place that's quite exposed.
But we also have a shared work stream between, uh,
Simon Watts as the climate change lead, uh, minister,
and, uh, the national leader, which Chair forum po
around climate change led by Marma Royal.
Uh, and I mentioned earlier today,
there's been a huge amount of work around reviewing
resilience throughout the country to climate change,
sea inundation, and a whole bunch of other initiatives.
Now, across portfolios mentioned this, uh,
there are some, uh, initiatives and Dave
and the team, of course, uh, hold others to account
around this, uh, matter where addressing
or responding to climate change impacts is being,
um, met with deliberate intentional mahi to do things
around housing in, I'll give you a great example.
There is a place, it's a beautiful place called Colic Bay.
Colic Bay is about 50 ks west of Inver Cargo life.
I was brought up in the sticks,
but this is the proverbial being, uh,
aka Manel.
Titi is the name of, uh, Nu down there. They have a problem.
The water's coming over the road
and going into their, literally from the sea.
They have a bad day, bad day out,
mu birding, there never is.
The water comes over, goes straight into their nui windows.
Love to see you. I
think you're gonna leave me another question.
Come you happy to come in for a fourth time?
Uh, so that water goes into
the down there.
Now, dock has the opportunity
to enable a place called,
which is 20 Ks back towards Ingo,
and is a Montary headland
and a place known as Aima Riverton.
And the role of Dock is to better enable
flexible arrangements, regulatory arrangements, so
that Mara can be relocated.
It's not just about writing a check to a marai
to relocate itself.
Sometimes it's about ensuring
that the agencies work cohesively
to better enable the regulatory environment to ensure that
that Mara can be relocated from
and to deliver the, um, you know, the, uh, identity,
um, revitalization
of those people down at the bottom of the South island.
Uh, Q ka.
Uh, so in response to your query
and your around climate resilience
and emergency planning, absolutely.
Finally, uh, there is
available in the Maori Development Fund,
and we've collapsed a whole range of funds, bits
and bobs all over the place.
And Karen here can speak to this into one fund.
There's been a reduction, as you've, uh,
described from 45 million to 5 million,
but we've had some phenomenal, um, uh,
experiences over the last 12 months enabling
money owned businesses.
I'll give you a great example.
And what they're doing with fusion technology,
the drone essentially do something.
I think it's probably as important as splitting the atom
c Ruthford did 120 years ago,
and 20 has been Dave, uh,
right at the heart of providing, um, you know, a bit
of raving fan support,
but also a little bit of p toko to enable that type
of business to get moving from where to go.
In addition to that, uh,
we've also been instrumental in enabling businesses
to go from a, um, a what call seed phase, um,
and getting themselves up
and moving so they can approach the regional infrastructure
fund or, uh, the NPI funds
or other, uh, government support to go from way to go.
Now, there's a whole range of, um, examples
that we can use there, uh,
but I just wanted to mention those
because the, um, the mahi that's been undertaken by way of
that Maori development fund within
the new plan around how go government can support Maori
economic initiatives, the applied to replace that
with Maori infrastructure, co-investment exports,
and simplifying Maori land legislation
and other regulatory arrangements to enable SMEs to thrive.
That's where we're at. Karen, you comment?
Um, no, I Thank you.
Just to, um, add to that, um, so
we had a little bit of a practice going this year.
Yeah. We are, have been challenged
to consolidate funding going from aging funds into one
to really focus across, um,
priorities across economic department.
Also recognizing that there'll be some social
and cultural norms within each community.
Absolutely. Um, so we'll also be supporting that.
Um, we have continued alongside as supporting, um,
any Maori organizations in network infrastructure, um,
helping to, um, just that a little bit
of de-risk in acceleration to be able to export.
Um, but for also, um, the focus this year on, um,
continued focus on, uh, employment.
So, um, really further developing our focus to ensure
that, um, Maori come out
with recognized qualifications level for and above.
Yeah. Um, so that our better position for high skilled, um,
high, um, employment and that au um,
and income increases.
So, you know, one of the things that, um, you know,
I'm really enthusiastic about is some of these, uh,
organizations and businesses that, uh,
the team have been supporting, they are out there.
Like, they're not global. They're galactic.
And, uh, you look at the mahi that's been done down at,
I don't know if he of you been there, not nui,
this is down in Gore, um, long way from, um,
uh, Northern Civilization,
but they're trying to build a logistics pool
and inland port down there.
And they is right at the heart of driving
that alongside logistics businesses.
And we'll be able to give them a little bit of total call,
uh, to enable the alongside rural transport limits
to complete some master planning.
Now, if they can actually move from a master plan
to developing an inland port, the environmental impacts of
that alone are substantial
because you move basically a whole bunch of, uh, uh,
um, carbon off the system,
basically reduce carbon emissions by having a more efficient
logistics and, uh, port development.
That's the sort of stuff that, again, I know
that some people aren't in the by for, by Maori, for Maori,
for everybody, COPA in Space Iron,
because I think that actually ultimately
Maori economic development
and commercial development will be the balance
that this country needs to get
to the space, the Prime Minister.
So well articulates that we want to be a leading small
economy, advanced economy in this world,
our La Denmark, or our La Singapore.
Ultimately, that can only happen if Maori economics
and Maori commercial development is on top of the job.
So we'll leave you with the last question.
We move on from this area where you go, I'm glad, uh,
minister, you are excited about the things that are,
are coming, but I can only feel, um, disappointed
and even more, um, depressed really about the lack
of funding that's gone into, um, Maori,
um, knowing that, you know,
for 25 years plus I've been working on the ground, uh,
with AU and, um, there are so much, uh,
goodness that is there for our people, but we can only grow
and, um, yeah,
we can only grow our people more with more pia.
Um, we need more, uh, advocacy for funding into, um,
growing and developing the current, uh, initiatives
that are there and strengthening those copa
Maori organizations.
Um, so one of the things that comes up a lot from whanau
and providers down on the ground, their concern is, is that
with the reduction in funding, uh, in Vote Maori
and into TPK, how will, um, the vote, uh,
assist TPK, uh, with ensuring that we get access
to the grants that are available
and that it's going to the right organ organizations
knowing that there are so little now, there's
so little resource, you know, it's almost like we're,
we are gonna be scrapping each other
and we continue to have to do that,
and we don't wanna do that.
Um, but how are we going to get,
or how is the vote going to assist DPK to ensure
that we access those, um, those grants?
It's a very, it's a very big question,
and I'm just mindful of time.
If we just try and provide a six sector answers, we,
Yeah. Okay. So
just, Hey, look, first to acknowledge concerns,
the second thing is we should never subscribe to the view
that Tonga as a derivative or recipient of Car Tonga.
And that's how we express ourselves, in my view.
It's not, however, I think what, um, your, um, uh,
observations do, uh, reinforce is that
where we are delivering better, um, uh, uh, public services,
if it's delivered better on the ground through
or with Maori organizations that,
and that's credible, then we should do that.
Uh, so the, the notion that, uh, there's an,
there's a magic money tree for grants
or funding, I think is, uh, not what you are describing,
but I think we should be careful not to fall into that space
as well, because ultimately, uh, you know, I don't think
that the role of Go Government is to be a, a master, um, uh,
um, of a master fund.
And all we're doing is running
contestable funds in government.
I don't think that's the role of government.
However, the observation
that there are credible mining organizations
that can deliver more effective public services,
I'm absolutely into that.
Hence why I'm a big fan of, uh, the Wau Water COPA
and also the type of devolution that works.
Second, you know, you could talk about injecting, um, uh,
the injections for kids,
immunization injections at two years old.
The initiative that Dr. Shane Verti announced a couple
of years back around putting more money through final order
to enable that tick, I'm all about that
around the economic development front.
There has been a slight reduction in the entire budget
for the Maori development fund.
And, uh, we've tilted
that budget in towards Maori economic development.
Your view that A TPK should be doing more
or get more money to enable that, I think that's one view,
but I think the other view which we've shared today is TPK
holding other agencies to account like MB that,
and like, um, NFO
and like, uh, uh, other agencies
that are involved in economic development,
like infrastructure agencies, health education.
Absolutely. Absolutely.
We should be holding those agencies to account to make sure
that they do spend their money credibly
and wisely, sometimes through procurement
with Maori organizations, sometimes through others
to deliver on the needs.
Absolutely.
Okay. Very good. We've got two short, uh, items left here.
The first one is the Maori Trust service.
And Willie, have you got a question?
I was just gonna, is there any update in terms of, um,
about all day, uh, where we are with, in terms of policy,
uh, with regards to landlocked, uh, land?
Is there a, um, update in that area?
No, no update,
but I think there's recognition, uh, that, that it,
that it is a massive issue
and it provides a huge range of productivity outside this.
Uh, so look, there's no update, uh, that the, um,
the initial work that was done, uh, around landlocked land,
particularly in areas of great interest to, uh,
myself being from the area
where there's the most landlocked land in New Zealand Oh,
and yourself too vo, Mr. Jackson, uh, your relays
and more funnels, I think is really, really important.
I do know of some initiatives around unlocking, uh,
Maori land that is landlocked, uh, through agency work.
So some of the agencies who are in between the road
and the Landlock land are doing some work around unlocking
that land that is ongoing, and we support that.
It's, uh,
but there's no one single silver bullet to dealing with
that issue right now.
Uh, and my own observations is it takes a lot of work
with private owners,
but also with public agencies who are in between the road
and that landlocked land the most important
of which are Dock Lins and the,
and administrative, oh, sorry, um, defense.
So there's a bit of work to do there,
aside from the private owners
who have their own arrangements,
and we haven't really, um, got a lot
of penetration into the issue just yet.
You got update on it, Bernard?
Um, uh, just to quickly say that we're looking at a range
of different measures, a direct legislative, uh, um,
engagement on landlocked land.
Um, we've explored that through the engagement
that we would did with Tu Maori,
and essentially it's come back
and suggested to us that that's probably not the best tool
or mechanism to undertake, um, that actually a lot
of this requires, um, quite specific nuanced solutions
for each of the issues that are involved, which involves,
uh, local council, um, as the MR was saying other agencies.
And then there's a important, um, fellow Maori landowners
who live right next door as well.
So, um, we are looking at, uh, exploring sort of remedies
and also working with Maori trustees.
And part of what we are looking at in terms of amendments
to their act will directly be able to, uh, impact on
supporting, um, landowners to be able
to unlock some of the land.
Yeah, I, I think ditto the reserve lands, which, uh, has,
has had some solutions, uh,
in the past the Maori Reserve Lands Act, amendment Act.
Uh, but I don't think it's a complete solution
and certainly not for all loans long way to go.
Alright. Okay. Let's move on to the last item,
which is supporting Maori community
organizations. Um,
Minister, We know about your obsession, uh,
and, uh, passion
and love for Iwi, uh, as you, uh, um, always,
uh, reiterate.
But, um, what sort of comfort can you give, uh,
to community organizations about your support?
Uh, urban organizations gone through a quite a, a,
a, a vigorous process,
and we'll get to au uh, uh, uh, obviously
after lunch, look forward to it.
But what, what sort of commitment can you
and your organization give to, to, um,
community organizations?
Uh, that the support will still be there
because, you know, as I said, you know,
there's a real concentration on Iwi.
Um, it's been a struggle
for community organizations over the years to get the crown
to recognize that we have the same, um, uh, rights
as people, uh, at iwi level.
Uh, and, uh, um,
and we've actually got that
reiterated minister in contracts.
We've had msds, uh, have, we, we, we've, we, we've had
to remind them, uh, particularly through
contracting processes that, uh,
you cannot discriminate against NGOs, uh, and,
and contract, uh, when contracts go up for tender.
So what, what, what, what, what's your commitment in terms
of those community organizations, urban organizations, NGOs?
Uh, is it the same type of commitment that you give
to your beloved iwi?
First of all, uh, you know, every morning has an iwi,
but not every Maori has an urban organization
because some of us are doing, so that's the first thing. So
You're saying no, No, no, again, um, you know,
just be careful where that's going.
The second thing is, there's greater budget now in the Maori
communication, uh, community organizations, uh,
sliver in appropriation than there was last year.
It's 'cause of the support that's been given
to the Maori Women's Wealthy League and Maori wardens.
The third thing is we are absolutely into, uh, you know,
locally led, uh, whanau sense government enabled solutions
and delivering public services more effectively
that sometimes involve Maori urban Maori organizations.
Uh, and my expectation, of course is in the monitoring,
the exemplary monitoring that our data Jedi do at 20,
uh, that they can showcase
and raise up, uh, those examples
where urban Maori organizations involved,
where they are doing those, um, uh, undertaking
and delivering or facilitating public services
very, very effectively.
Uh, it's also my, um, uh, uh, request of
that are made, uh, uh, over the year to make sure
that we do engage meaningfully
and effectively with urban Maori organizations.
Sometimes not always welcoming of, uh,
or even me as the minister, but we still
have to have that cordial
You, Uh, because
I'm not talking about anyone in particular.
No, no, no, no. But we still have to have that court at all.
And I, you know, at a personal level as a member
for Hamilton West to regularly, uh, catch up with Andrea
and, uh, and now and again with lady, uh, two days in,
and they do phenomenal work, absolutely brilliant work,
particularly in the housing space
and the whole water space, you know,
that Targety two facility she's got down in
and, um, just on the other side of Fairfield there.
Outstanding. So I think that ultimately, uh,
we do recognize and, um, appreciate,
uh, the exemplary mahi
that many urban mining organizations are involved in
delivering some of those key, uh, public services often, um,
kapa or wau centered and locally led.
And where I can, uh, have some, not just influence,
but advocacy is to ensure that those ministers that,
as you know, um, manager
and at the apex of 99.5% of all funding recognize
that urban Maori organizations
who are doing really positive constructive things on the
ground are engaged
and we are suitable, um, uh, formally engaged
to continue to do their fine money.
I'm absolutely format and, uh, my expectation with Dave
and others is to, is to get engaged
and find out how we can continue to do, um, to enable,
sorry, enable those urban Maori organizations.
Okay. I'm gonna bring this, uh, session to an end here,
and we're gonna, again for lunch.
Could I please have everybody by 10 past one please?
10 past one. We'll start with the
Thank you very much.
And, uh, we will, uh, bring the meeting back into order.
Uh, just before we move into this, I just want to, uh,
remind each other everybody that we've, we've traverse, uh,
a lot of, uh, different, uh, this morning,
we're now into the final stretch with regards to,
and, uh, I know that we've also got a lot of experience,
including the gentleman, boys, we speak
in this particular areas,
but be mindful that, you know, the purpose of scrutiny is
to focus on, uh, the, the, the government's policies
and the vote, the preparations, estimates
that are associated with that and surrounding that.
'cause I think it's attempting to sort of, uh, go
through a lot of history and that at least make sure we, uh,
keep the intent of what this, uh, scrutiny is all about.
But, um, uh, with that, I think we can, uh,
open up straight away for questions pending.
Afternoon, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
And, uh, GU good to see everybody again.
Uh, w order Minister, my questions will be direct
with respect to, um, uh, as well as,
and what appears to me to be a, uh, uh,
here I use the term a fiscal cliff, uh,
but certainly no, uh, guarantee to the providers
nor to those access those services for the ongoing
benefits from those particular, uh, initiatives
that I thought were producing very good outcomes.
Yes. Uh, in relation to those two projects,
which I think I recall reading the reports there were some
very positive
and constructive outcomes, uh, from each of those projects.
I do understand, and, uh, maybe the team can, uh,
provide some feedback,
but a couple of those, uh, funding stream
that can contributed to those matters.
I think they were time limits of funding.
Can I just ask, uh, uh,
the team here just to comment on that?
Um, it was considered a prototype and its testing phase
and the contracts for due to
end this year,
And there was time limited.
Um, yes.
Well, the contracts finished,
we're extending those contracts to the end of November.
Sorry, say that again, Sorry.
Um, we was sending contracts to the end
of November at this stage,
and then we intend for, to become part
of the general commissioner.
Excellent. So, so what's, sorry if I may miss chair,
what's the rationale for the extension?
Uh, is did you just give two dates end
of June and then November? How?
Uh, yes. So the original end
of contract was the 50th of June.
June. Um, but we have offered an extension yes.
To the current provider just as a, a way of transitioning,
um, those contracts.
Yes. And is that, is that the case? Sorry, sorry.
Is that the case for, um, na uh, sorry.
Uh, slightly different.
Two, the government committed to four year mark funding,
um, and then for our years as well, and we've just complet.
So that was, um, uh, that was for the, what,
what we call the test phase.
Um, and we are in that year two of the test base
for Nafi two,
But the NAFI two had a couple of streams of funding, one
of which was a CC, who was no longer funded two project.
Oh, they found us. Is that this year
found us and yeah.
Yes, that's right. So, um, as part of NA two A CC, um,
for the first two years, uh, contributed fund for the test,
uh, test surveys contributed 5.2 million each year.
Yes. Um, it was always, um, on the cards
that they would have that,
that funding would be finished on the, of June this year.
Yeah, absolute because the first two years was contingent on
collecting the information that they needed
to build a business case in which the a CC board would, um,
need to consider that.
Um, they did, that was not, um, that did not happen, and
therefore their funding is finishing at the end
of this financial year.
And just to round out the questions regard by head tier,
'cause that was a multi stream initiative as well, is there,
is there something similar or a reflection
or a comment you'd like to make about that moving forward
to the November period for the transition?
Uh, yes. Um, we are working with, so as, as you know, has,
um, their operational funding, which is continuing Oh, good.
And, um, our partner corrections, um,
so we are the contracts that we doing with corrections, um,
but they are having discussions
with the provider about other things that they might be able
to do with them, continu,
and then we also have a, a new commissioning agencies.
That's right.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Benjamin.
Um, just digging in a little bit further into, um,
question around, um,
I just wanna understand a little bit more around
the identification
and mitigation of risks that may, um,
Eventuate because of that transitional period
or the reduction in funding.
I understand that it was for a contingent period
and that that was always foreseen,
but there will always be a potential risk when there is a
transition or a reduction in funding
because it can create a bit of a vacuum
or a, a gap in special knowledge
or access that people have had to one service,
they may not know where to go next.
So has there been a, a, a risk assessment to identify
and mitigate those potential issues in the future?
Minister, I'd be keen to hear from you first.
Well, you know, that's a matter
that's been managed at an operational level.
Uh, but certainly as I mentioned
before, I thought that high headed Anthony Tu both had some
very advantageous outcomes.
Uh, and the work that was taken a place in Nazi keeping, um,
kids engaged with whanau
and not ending up in state care is something
that I think is, um, uh, the right thing
to do when it's credibly done
and purposefully done as it has in many, many instances,
it's actually very successful.
That's what we talked about before
around locally lived centered, um,
government enabled solutions
and our ideology of world, which is sometimes it's better
for the community to do things or business to do things,
and we should just fund and hold that
to account rather than the
government thinking we can do things.
But at the operation level, risk management.
Yeah. Keen to hear and answer all my
questions, so that would be good.
So, so mentioned to, um, at the end of the
first stage, which, which, um, uh,
which was the first two years of funding, um,
there was an assessment that was a review
that was started taken by DPMC, um, to be able to just check
what were the particular elements that needed to be
that were going well, but also, uh, what needed
to be strengthened in terms of, um,
the program going forward.
Um, but one of the key things that came out of that, uh,
assessment was the importance of having, um,
much more formal governance structures.
Um, so to your, so your, to your point about risk, um,
in order to be able to actively manage the risks
that might be associated with program.
Um, so when we moved into, so when the four year funding
for four years was secured, um,
and we moved into that, that particular part,
the test phase, um, we enabled, um, governance,
formal governance structure between the three entities.
So that's a c, C, and, um, to,
and that's been active for the first year for year one
and year two, um, as a way of supporting management, um,
the risks, the risks that might, um, might appear, um,
in terms of, um, uh, in terms of, think of the second part
of your question around, um, you know,
what happens when funding might go.
So that was, everybody was quite awake to that possibility,
um, from the beginning of the test phase.
Um, and what we've done is worked with, uh,
and, um, tepo MA have worked, uh, together to
re um, re-look at, well,
what are the operational arrangements that now need
to be put, uh, be, be put in place in order to, um,
have the, have the, um, program continue for the 700 whanau,
but also recognize that there's not, um,
as much funding going in as previously experienced.
So thank you very much.
So to build on that last point you made around the fact
that it has been, uh, a finite haul, I guess, or,
or you were aware of this potential transition
and the need to then figure out a plan.
Has that planning already happened
or were, were you waiting for a specific point to implement
or produce that plan for those whanau that are accessing it?
Um, so that work has been ongoing since the beginning,
like in this last quarter of the financial year in order
to be able, once we had it formally confirmed from a CC,
that they would not be able to take the funding forward.
Um, that was the planning that has, um, that has,
that has happened as a result.
Are you able to give us an indication
of when we might be able to see what the plans are
For, For, for that transitional period
or to mitigate the risk of whanau
who are currently accessing that service
but then may not be able to anymore?
So the arrangements are between the two entities.
So that's to and Ana.
Um, and then Ana has their specific arrangements with each
of the providers that then work with the AU
ana have committed to, um, with is that they will be,
to be able to provide the service to the 700 whanau
that were part of the, that part of the cohort, um,
which are part of, yeah.
So you can follow through, um, the progress
that maker that context. So it's, yeah.
Yeah, that makes sense. Yeah. Thank you very much.
Um, we've had 20 years of ura, uh, from Dame Tu
and t Mason, and last week we celebrated 10 years
of the Wana Water Commissioning Agency,
and we had a really great celebration
amongst all the providers that have been part
of the Wana Water Commissioning Agency over those 10 years.
I guess my, my passi is around
how do you justify the move from, uh, a credible, uh,
high performing, uh, provider
or commissioning agency into these new agencies
and knowing that we had a credible, uh,
fire water commissioning agency, what is the, what cost
has it been to establish these new commissioning agencies
and how much has been ringfenced for that, knowing
that we already had, um, a very, uh, yeah, credible,
um, high performing provider that, uh, never,
um, missed the audit.
So how do you justify that?
Okay. So the first thing is that, uh, the mahi
around whanau order as an appropriation
and a program that was enabled
or supported by government has been around for decade, uh,
longer than that actually.
Uh, and really launched off with mahi of, uh,
Dame Ana, a professor of Mason jury, uh,
but also with the scaffolding of the Civil English
and others in the national lead government 20 2008 and 2017,
and started off with a little bit of pia, which rose
between, you know, 10 30 million right up
to 180 million more recently.
And there've been some excellent, uh, outcomes facilitated
by not just the commission agencies, but the providers
and the navigators on the grid.
And I'm met here up to those, uh,
who have been involved in a wide variety of
responsibilities, uh, in different roles, uh,
in different organizations.
Uh, and many of the providers
and navigators that have been engaged over the last few
years, uh, continue to be engaged now through the new, uh,
commissioning agencies engaging with similar
and sometimes the same providers like down South
and who effectively, uh,
and reengaged the same providers who are operating under
puga, uh, or Parliament.
And after 10 years, uh, with no additional procurement,
that procurement has been undertaken, uh, at an operational,
uh, level by, uh, Dave
and his role as secretary for Maori development.
Uh, and, uh, that's an operational matter
that has been progressed with the front, um, uh,
expectations for requirements through the RFP process.
Uh, and ultimately team, uh, Dave, uh,
made a decision around the successful commission agencies,
uh, and those have changed, as you've noted.
Uh, but importantly, uh, um, our expectation is
that whanau in need, uh, will continue
to be supported at the provider and navigator.
And I'll leave it to Dave too, I comment any further.
Thanks, minister. Yeah.
So, so as, um, as the minister has said that, um,
w Water in its current state now has been around
for 10 years now, the outcomes for Wana Water,
those outcomes have not changed.
But there are some fundamental shifts that we were looking
for in the procurement process,
and part of the priority under W Water is
to expand wana water
and ensure that it compliments the social
investment approach.
Now, what I can say to you around the room is that as the
secretary for Maori development
and, um, overseeing whanau water, one of the things
that annoyed me most when I was trying to get the adoption
of whanau water across the public service system is,
I would be, when I asked the question, the answer to me
would be, yeah, but Dave, you can't prove it.
And that's because of the lack of evidence and data.
Now, what has occurred under, um,
the social investment approach
and the minister has directed me
to compliment the social investment approach is
that it has become apparent
that right across the public service, when they say that
to me, you can't prove it.
I can now reply, you can't either.
So the intention here is to get finer water ahead
of the game to be able to prove it, particularly
with evidence and data
and the five shifts that we are after.
And that's what we procured on top of the 10 on top
of the outcomes, the funnel water outcomes.
One was reach and being able to reach into those
with high needs, those communities.
The second is evidence, and that's through the IDI
and data through, um, the deprivation index.
The NEX is workforce and looking at the workforce
development of navigators and providers in particular,
and making sure that that, that they are, uh,
funded appropriately to do that work.
And the final part of this was targeting
and making sure with that evidence and data
and with the infrastructure that we put around AU water,
including, uh, invest an investment committee that is linked
to the community, making sure
that we actually get those outcomes identified
and the wana water outcomes to those
who most need those outcomes.
So an answer to that question, w Water
in its current state is added to
by those five shifts.
And those five shifts are what we procured on top
of those final audit outcomes.
It was not the same.
And that was made clear in the request
for proposing documentation.
Oh, William, did you have a supplement?
Yeah, I haven't, I have a couple of supplementary,
um, questions.
Um, given the, uh, a claim given
to the Whanau Water commissioning, uh, agency, uh,
and it's actually had been internationally acclaimed,
as you well know, Dave, um, passed every
financial review when we first came in in 2017,
Winston Peters commissioned the review straight away,
passed with flying colors.
Um, if you're looking from the outside, it looked like a,
a surprise, uh, that, uh, that,
that they would lose the contract.
Uh, all the incumbents lost. I just need to hear from you.
Were you under any directions from, from cabinet in terms
of getting rid of the incumbents, though?
Absolutely not. This was a decision that,
that didn't involve any ministers cabinet.
This came through a procurement process and beside me,
and that procurement process was, um, audit New Zealand,
and we had a probity officer from Audit New Zealand
that went through an evaluation panel panel that had,
there were moderation, um, stages in that
before it came to me.
So no minister, no cabinet was involved in this.
Thanks. Thanks for that though. Someone
asked the minister, uh, Mr.
Chair, um, we had clear declarations
from the Deputy Prime Minister in the House, Winston Peters,
that, uh, they were gonna go
after the Whanau Water Commissioning Agency
total declaration from the Deputy Prime Minister, a number
of times that they were gonna get rid
of the whanau Order commissioning agency
because of, to party.
Let's put it on the table, because of the tap Maori, um,
uh, alliances.
Uh, did the, as a minister, was that brought up
with you from the Deputy Prime Minister, or,
or, I mean, if you have a, a, a Deputy Prime Minister making
that declaration in the house, surely,
I know you've gotta be careful with Captain,
but surely there must have been pressure on you
to basically just get rid of the, uh, incumbent
because of the tap Maori, uh, relationship.
You still know Mr. Minister?
No, uh,
and I'm very proud that this government supports whanau
and is determined to maintain, uh, the budget, uh,
and the commitment through the appropriation.
Ultimately, the procurement, uh, was with Dave.
Uh, and there are those shifts, as Dave has mentioned, uh,
in the procurement process from something
that happened 10 years ago.
Uh, but no,
So you are saying no, nothing from New Zealand first,
no pressures, nothing or never ever discussed that, uh,
the incumbent, uh, had to go
because, uh, the president of the Maori party is the,
is the, uh, leader of the Whanau Water Commissioning Agency?
No, no discussions
At all. No. What I'm
really focused on is making sure that, uh,
I support Dave to do his job, uh, which he has done in this
and a great deal of, uh, many other processes.
Uh, there are people with views
and kill, that's people's views.
Uh, I've gotta make sure that the responsibility
of the minister for Whanau water, uh, is upheld, which, um,
uh, confident that I've done.
And I also note, uh, for the record
that I'm sure other governments have considered procurement
and reprocurement of Han order before too,
Just a briefs.
You mentioned, um, the social investment, um, approach
and the work streams with whanau order, um, to
create a cohesion between those two factors.
And I would just like to understand in a little bit more
detail, um, what work has planned
or has been undertaken to kind
of have a seamless approach to that?
Um, and, um, how will
that be incorporated into the future delivery
of Wau Order commissioning?
Well, um, you know, I think we,
we should be clear about what we support.
We support Wau order in the way that Supreme procured, uh,
there's an increased evidence basis
and some of that synchronizes for with social investment.
I do not think that Whanau Water is a subsidy
of social investment because it's born out
of slightly different circumstances and drivers as well.
What social investment, uh, does lean into is the spending
of an inordinate amount of,
and social services up to 70 billion.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and the social space by successive governments
and ensuring that there is a stronger, uh, more articulated
evidence base around
that pier resulting in outcomes being achieved, uh,
and also targets and priorities.
Uh, so whilst whanau order is, uh, mindful, uh,
of the social investment approach that has been enunciated,
uh, by Minister of Finance, Nicola, we, uh, I am,
am not seeing Whanau Water as a, uh, subsidiary
of social investment or indeed a target
for a hostile takeover by social investment.
That's not that the space that I'm in,
because W Water has a very, very, uh, determined
and clear cultural basis for the health
and wellbeing of our people.
That is a cultural health
and wellbeing of our people, as
well as social health and wellbeing.
So there are slightly different, um, uh, drivers, uh,
and aspirations, and those are set out in the seven
final audit statements.
Yeah. Um, but the word was compliments,
compliments the social, um, investment approach.
And just to, um, add to the minister's comments,
but then we'll talk about transition.
And I, I'd like, um, grace to talk about that, um,
in terms of our social set to spend,
and we've discussed this before at this committee,
and the minister mentioned the $70 billion on
the social spend.
Um, but in terms of commissioning
services out into the community, that's been refined now,
um, to around $8 billion for commission
for services that are commissioned
out through the community.
And of that $8 billion, 50% of
that 4 billion goes to 85% of the population.
The other 50% goes to 15% of the population.
And the reason why we spend $4 billion on 15%
of the population is because they're hard to reach.
Yes. And they're high needs,
and we in the public service are not delivering well
to those communities.
And Whanau Water is an opportunity where we can get
that delivery to those communities.
But what's pretty clear to me is that
unless you can prove it with data
and evidence by linking that to the IDI
and ensuring you've got the right data through, um,
the community bottom up data feeds that come into, um,
this approach, this new procured approach,
that you won't be able to win the argument.
And this puts Whanau Water,
the new whanau order at the front of being able
to win that argument.
Never again do I want to have someone, have someone say
to me, yeah, but you can't prove it.
Right. Grace, in terms of the transition
Yeah. Q other day.
Uh, so working closely
with the Social Investment Agency has, um,
has been a focus since the Social Investment agency was
created last year, actually.
Mm-hmm. And we've worked really closely around the, uh,
requirements of what does social investment mean to ensure
that is really closely aligned to the minister's point.
We, um, want to make sure that there is a strong, um,
relationship there, knowing though
that W Water has its own characteristics
and it has its own whakapapa,
and we want to make sure that we preserve that it's an and
and it's not a, um, there isn't a conflict there
in terms of transition.
We've been working closely, um, without
other central agency colleagues
and including Social Investment Agency to ensure
that the transition goes smoothly.
We know it's happening at pace.
We know that one July is, uh, coming from us very quickly,
but social investment have been with us every step
of the way to ensure that the work
that we are doing actually is in line with
what their approach is, and it compliments
their work program as well. Yeah.
Just, sorry, just to gain a little bit more depth
of understanding and interesting use
of the term hostile takeover minister, um,
I think the complimentary, um, visioning
of it is quite useful.
And I, I just wanna dig a little bit deeper into the how,
uh, you will preserve that unique f**k
and culture of AU Water in that complimentary relationship
with the social investment approach.
Um, you've described it, and I, and I think it sounds great,
but I just wanna understand if there are plans
that are in place or what the, the specific details of
that are, if you have any to share with us.
This was a key focus of the procurement process
that we didn't want to go out
to procure new commissioning services just by
any entity that could commission.
Well, we are really conscious of our populations
and communities that we're trying to serve.
We are conscious of the, um, the reach being about trust,
and particularly mistrust often of the public service
as we wanted to make sure that the commissioning agencies
that we were going to, um, award contracts to, would be able
to, uh, continue with that characterization of being able
to be trusted by the community, being able
to have that reach as well.
So when we were going through
and doing the evaluation, we were looking at a number
of different components that would ensure
that we were keeping that ppa,
keeping those characteristics at front of mind. Cool.
So building on that trust as well. Yeah.
Yeah. The, the seven funnel outcomes,
they have preserved this, um, let's not, um, think
for any reason why we're going to that we are going to, um,
remove those from the arrangements
or from the aspiration of farm order.
They are very top of mind.
We do have targets and priorities as a government.
Uh, and, you know, some people don't like that.
Uh, we have targets
and priorities, uh, me, emergency housing
as a title, everyone knows it.
And, you know, I can talk to the cows come home about
how I'm determined to get kids out of hotels.
Um, ditto.
Uh, I, I think that the, um, expectation around evidencing,
uh, outcomes as a result of the fund order providers
and navigators is now incumbent upon the commission agencies
to make sure that those are achieved.
And what I see is, uh, a lot of, um,
uh, at the outset across the commission agencies
to make sure that there is a, um, solid, cohesive
reporting system for one of better term IT system, uh,
across all the agencies.
So we don't have four
or five different startup IT ideas, uh,
around the collection and analysis of data.
I think that's a good thing. And I also think that, um,
you know, and acknowledge the important
and massive that's gone on for the 10, 20 years, um, prior
to this point time.
Thank you. I, you good to start from Greg?
Uh, well actually it's become a comment now
because, um, grace has actually answered
the, answered the question.
So, well, uh, Dave, I was, I was gonna ask, um,
for more detail in terms of, uh,
how the IDI was gonna inform this, but yeah.
Um, what I'll just say is thank you very
much, um, for the shift.
The first time you came for this committee, uh,
you spoke about that exact desire to want to be able
to measure, and, uh, clearly the changes
that you've made in this, uh,
recent few months have set you up
for, for that. So thank you.
Got Kenny. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, my question is direct
to the transition and the workforce.
My initial read after the announcement made
for the transition into the South island has seen a slash
of almost one third
of the W Water navigators available in the south island,
not transitioning into the new provider.
Mm-hmm. So my question there specifically is about, uh,
uh, that particular workforce
and how we might be able to, uh,
because I accept that the budget in terms of the entirety
of Wau budget hasn't changed,
but we've got a workforce there that is number one connector
to our wau to provide the service that we are looking for.
And the second part to that question is about equity
and the equity of pay.
There was a big issue, um, with respect to navigators
and those who work in this particular sector
around fair equitable pay.
Mm-hmm. And I wonder if in the procurement that was
procurement process that was executed by,
in the negotiations for new commissioning agencies, whether
or not pay equity was a consideration?
Um, well, Chris, did you wanna answer that?
I can, but maybe you do.
Yeah, I can, I can jump in on both of those issues
with lunch and stuff.
Um, so on the first question, um, regarding, uh,
region three, which is to wamu.
So under the procurement, we took the existing budget
and we, um, allocated 700 navigators out of that.
So just to give you some context, the current contracts
for final order do not have a service design aspect in terms
of how many navigators should be employed
or, um, where specifically they should go.
So we don't have a distribution model
that clearly articulates how
and where resources should be allocated.
So when we went to market, there were a number of things
that we had learned over the past 10 years
that we wanted to address.
Some of those things, uh, are things that we wanted
to do better, and some of them were things
that had gone well, but we could do better still.
One of the things that we wanted
to do better on was ensuring that
resources were going into communities
where we had the highest need.
And so we took the 700 navigators
and we allocated them across the four regions based on
the deprivation index.
And this was deprivation data from the 2023 census
where we took the highest deprivation
communities, eight, nine, and 10.
And we allocated the navigators according to that,
that did see a redistribution,
and it meant that our navigator numbers in region
three decreased.
What it did mean as well,
that our communities in Northland in particular had a
significant increase in the number of navigators.
So this was really trying to allocate more fairly
where the navigators needed to go.
I acknowledge that into y Pro Namu.
It does mean that we've had, um, a number
that is a decrease.
However, just to be clear, there is no contracted number
of navigators under the current contract.
And we are aware that a number
of our commissioning agencies, we are employing navigators
through other contracts as well.
So if you had a number of navigators, we are not, um,
sure necessarily if all of those navigators are
through the commissioning contract.
On the second issue around the pay equity one, one
of the five shifts that Dave mentioned earlier was
about workforce development.
We know that the people who do the heaviest lifting in wana
order are those at the front line.
We know that those who are actually working with whanau,
who are dealing with really difficult issues day in,
day out, currently, a number
of those people are on short term contracts.
They are on quite low pay rates, they have job insecurity.
Um, they don't necessarily have
good professional development.
They don't necessarily have good professional supervision
to deal with some of the issues that they are dealing with.
So we did make it one of the key components of the RFP
that the incoming commissioning agencies,
whoever they may be, would need
to have a workforce development plan that identified all
of those issues and had a plan to address them.
We know that to get the shifts
that Wana Water is really capable of, we're gonna need
to have a workforce that is capable
and able to do that, that heavy lifting.
And so that is a key focus that we have pushed
through into our new commissioning agencies,
and they have subsequently rolled out into their
service provider contracts as well.
I think Remuneration,
I'll just add note.
Uh, from my perspective, there was no requirement
around specific navigator numbers, um, to YPO number.
Uh, and now there is a very clear requirement
around navigator numbers,
and that may have had an impact actually understand the
rationale around the deprivation index
and the assessment across the country.
Uh, and now we're really clear about the expectation
around navigated numbers throughout the country, including
one of, uh, the second thing is that me,
and, uh, this is not to reinforce, uh, Matua Woolie's, uh,
earlier presidential comments about being an iwi based
person, but I am pleased
that Iwi entities have put up their hands
because they do bring a different dimension.
Uh, it's not better
or worse, it's just a different dimension.
They have engagement with their AKA down the south island,
uh, and, uh, engagement with other based, uh, that are,
uh, that have been curated oriented,
and that's where it ultimately landed.
It's not to run down the urban organizations,
but I'm pleased that their entities put their hand
up and others did too.
Uh, but were unsuccessful in the commissioning, uh,
procurement process.
But it does, uh, um, allow for some, I'll call it, uh,
um, synchronized, um, engagement between
the iwi organizations
and end, Uh, the delivery of better, um,
public services by way of the w order appropriation.
The final comment that I'd make is,
and not to criticize racist comments, is that I do think
that the, um, uh, the workforce ka mahi across
providers and navigators, uh, have got huge commitment
around improving the health and wellbeing funnel.
The arrangements for the navigators are variable
across organizations.
Some they're very good
and some, okay, how can we help support them a bit better?
And, uh, having some expectations
through the procurement process,
I think ultimately will improve their situation.
Minister, you mentioned the wha of the kopa here
and Dari, it was all aspiration focused
and built on wha of aspiration.
I simply only want to express on the record my concern
that we continue to use simply the deprivation index mm-hmm.
In order to provide aspiration for our people.
Yes. I, I, I, and I think that's a genuine concern,
but I don't think it's the ultimately, uh, the, um,
the sole driver or even the main driver.
And there is some flexibility in the commissioning agencies
to determine where to best engage providers
and navigators that doesn't necessarily sit absolutely.
Consistency with, consistently with the deprivation index.
Uh, I think where your, uh, observations may be coming from,
and certainly, uh, I'm in the space too, is
that thriving whanau does not depend on deprivation.
Mm. Thriving whanau actually depends on helping defend the
part, but also realize the immense, immense individual
and collective, uh, potential that our wau, uh,
and our marai and have.
So, um, whilst we do, uh,
sit in a multi-decade context of closing the gaps
and inequities and inequalities, what we have seen,
and the only to look at, for example,
our entertainers like alien weaponry
and, um, six 60 to note
that actually there's huge potential, uh, in our product
that does not depend on something that it's,
that is reported as deprivation in the stats.
It's not. Uh, but we do, and we have used that.
What I'd love to see, of course, as an absolute, uh, gearing
and movement towards that notion of, um, potential
as the driver rather than deprivation as the driver.
And there's a lot of work that we have to do in that,
and sometimes we do that through the Maori Development Fund,
separate appropriation, but we look at that
and we use that example that we used before.
Open Star. Yeah, that's ation of energy,
but man, that has huge, huge potential
to really electrify the whole country.
Okay, Mr. Willie, um, Just in terms of, uh,
this couple of comments, I about three
or four questions that I wanna put put to you.
Um, uh, and,
and I, I hear what you're saying in terms of Iwi
was built on the streets of the cities.
It wasn't built by Iwi.
Uh, and, uh, and everyone knows
that it was the hard yards done
by our urban organizations off the smell
of an oily, oily rag.
Ana always conceded that,
and she always, uh, supported that.
Her aspiration, her mo Moya was, was for iwi to,
to take it up, but not take everything.
Uh, and there is some, there is always a bit of, uh,
a worry, uh, minister
because Iwi do have a lot of pier in terms of their backing.
They al they already, they already have a, a, a lot there.
So getting a balance right is incredibly, um, important.
And it's, but it's good to remember the, uh, uh,
original fight for Whanau water.
I wanna know about the consultation process.
Minister, given how controversial this COPA was,
did you consult, uh, with the, uh, with the,
uh, whanau water commissioning agencies before this?
And, uh, uh, was there a move for whether, whether it's you
or TPK, was there a strategy in terms of knowing
how controversial this was?
As I said, we talked about what New Zealand first has said,
and I accept your answer today.
Uh, but, but we also know how controversial this was.
Um, was there a process that was engaged by TPK in terms
of working with the Whanau Water Commissioning Agency?
They have said, uh,
and I, they've said to me that there was none, uh,
that they were not given reasons.
I wanna hear from you, Dave, of
was there clear reasons given to them in terms
of why they missed out on the contract?
Um, and, uh, um,
because, uh, given, uh, as, uh, Tash said over here,
the big conference last last week, um, we spoke at it,
I spoke at it hundreds
and hundreds of Maori, uh, at the conference.
A lot of dis satisfaction as you would,
wouldn't be surprised with the government.
Uh, and, and with TPK Dave, uh, in terms of, uh, the process
that has been engaged in, uh, no, no, no real criticism
of the commissioning, the, the,
the new commissioning agencies,
but criticism of GPK in terms of, of the process.
So what's, what, what have we done in terms of allying, uh,
affairs in terms of our communities,
that they've just been rolled over here,
that they're just being, they're just being used.
They see that they're being dealt to politically.
So I'd like to know what the process was.
I also wanna know in terms of you minister
with whanau water funding,
are we absolutely prioritizing Maori providers?
Another big question
that was brought up at the conference is this funding gonna
go to mainstream providers?
Um, and, and, and the reality is that, uh, in, in terms
of equity, our people don't see it as equity anyway,
as you well know or should know,
when Ana brought this policy in, her dream was
that it'd be a $1 billion a year.
Uh, you know, this day, a $1 billion a year, um, uh, uh,
a copa not, not a e, even though we got it
to 180 million or whatever it is.
Um, the dream wasn't for to be a was was it for
to be a a a $1 billion a year,
which would give some equity in terms of Maori.
So, so what's the plan, uh, with regards to that?
Uh, minister is, is that, uh, is that,
is that an aspiration?
Um, and I just, just wanted to put those questions out there
to you, given how major this has been, how,
how our communities have been affected,
how the po the politics of this.
There's just, there's so much involved there.
So I wanna put all those questions on the table.
If you could respond, please, uh, minister Dave, let's start
With Dave and that process, uh,
and the concerns, um, just in terms of the timeline,
'cause you've talked about, uh, going out to engage
and right through the procurement process.
And we, I, I'd have to call on Grace
to give me the specific dates,
but in terms of going out, um, we did go out, um, earlier,
um, last year at the beginning of the year.
Um, again, grace will confirm this to advise
what we were going to do around the procurement
and why we were procuring,
as I've explained to you here today.
Then we went through the ROI process and the RFP process
and engaged with the commissioning agencies
because all of the commissioning agencies entered into
that process, which is a normal procurement process,
ROI, and then RFP.
Then after that, we went into the,
and through that there are, there's opportunities
to question elements of both of those processes.
Then after that, we went into the evaluation process.
And then, um,
and then from that, the decision process at the end of that,
and we were still in the procurement process,
and I personally went out to the commissioning agencies,
the incumbent commissioning agencies,
and met with them to advise them
that they had not been successful.
The expectation, and I understand it, was
that they would be told that why
and be given a debrief there and then,
but we were still in a procurement process.
We had no one signed up.
The signing of those contracts from the commissioning
agencies didn't occur till much later.
So you're still in a procurement process,
and it's normal procurement rules that you don't debrief
until you know who has been successful.
And success is determined on when you finally
have that contract signed.
Once that was done, then they were debriefed
and they were debriefed in detail by the team in terms of,
of why they weren't successful, not just the incumbents,
but also others
who had applied in their procurement process.
So that's broadly how it worked.
And I understand, um, why people would think, oh, well,
we want to know the reason right now when, when we've talked
to you, but it's not outside the bounds that
the people who came first may not have been the people that
we had a contract with at
the end of the procurement process.
So we had to keep that open. That's normal.
But grace, uh, grace on the, the, the timings,
it was the beginning of 2024.
In December, 2023, Dave
and I met with Ana to inform 'em that we would like
to do a one year extension
because the contract was ending in June, 2024,
and we wanted to do a one year extension
because we wanted to go out into an
open procurement process.
So that was the first notification in December, 2023.
We then in January, met with Pacifica Futures anda
and had the same conversation about the one year extension.
And both, um, of those as well as pro council for the three
of them, they all signed up to
that one year extension in service of a procurement process.
After that, we then met with them face-to-face a number
of times to talk about the upcoming procurement
process, and we did have some of them.
So Pacifica Futures went out into the media
and did say, we are really keen on the procurement process.
We're open to it, and we're really looking forward
to the opportunity to have that retested.
So it wasn't a surprise
and it was something that we were very
open with in terms of our
Engagement.
I think, uh, just to make some observations
because again, uh, some of the questions were directed
to me, one of the observations around urban, uh,
authorities at the outset absolutely acknowledge that.
Um, but I also think that we have a different dynamic
and a different set
of capabilities overlapping in some
areas different than others.
Uh, the second thing is that I'm absolutely committed
to not only the longevity of, uh, the W water, uh,
uh, but also the endurance of the whanau water.
Uh, and certainly do not want to be, uh, exposed to,
um, the demographic makeup of parliament,
because ultimately the COPA is bigger than any
of us in the this room or this precinct.
Uh, and making sure that it is, uh, credible, uh, effective,
uh, and enduring is very important to me.
The final thing, and I think you mentioned, uh,
dollars billion, Dave, did you mention 8 billion before?
Yeah, 8 billion In the social services.
So let's get some, um, careful of using relativity.
Might get caught up with some of those iwi.
Uh, but let's log it up.
If it's 8 billion per annum
and we just did it on population 20%, 1.6 billion,
we did it on deprivation two to 3 billion.
So I think that our aspiration around funding
ultimately is very, very, um, important.
If you did it on credible delivery on the ground, uh,
that number again is different.
And I think it just gets some, uh, uh, for me, um,
not necessarily for you guys, but for me
to get a grip on the relativity
and the success of the delivery
of public services across government over years,
I think has been very, very mixed.
Wau Water has had some very good results
and having an improved evidence base, in my view,
positions it better to be a, uh, commissioning candidate,
uh, or a source of commissioning for whole range
of appropriations
and not just the finer water appropriation,
which ultimately is a very,
very small appropriation across a range of spending.
In the event that we're able to do this well, uh, and,
and continue on the good foundation that's been built,
I'd certainly be advocated, I'm sure everyone
around this state would be that more
of the commissioning spend
that's committed across government over multiple years
and budgets should go through the final order commissioning
with an improved evidence base in some of these other, um,
uh, additional matters.
And we talk about getting to people in need final
orders geared to that.
The, um, if I could just add the other side
to this is our other role monitoring.
Mm-hmm. Right? Because what do you think we will see when we
monitor and what is the solution to that?
And the minister has just described one of the solutions,
Well, mRNA, can I just have a quick response on
that mainstream question I asked then?
Mm-hmm. Because one of the fears of Maori providers is
that mainstream providers will just use them.
You know, it's, they they'll they'll put the ton up.
Yeah. They're gonna brown cla it.
Yeah, I'll put it too straight.
We brown cla the provision Sure.
And, and make out that we know everything about lobby.
And I don't think that that gives genuine effect to
what we described as, uh,
but credible engagement with the actual wha based outcomes
that Wau order was based on.
And I don't think any brown cladding that you can conjure up
or speculate around is ultimately geared
around those things, which for me, continue
to remain a unique and distinctive foundational aspect
and evolving aspect.
But continuing aspect of Whanau Water,
you take away those foundations.
What's the difference between that
and other government agencies?
Not a lot. And I don't think that the W Water providers, uh,
and navigators actually trying
to be the best parka agencies or providers they can be.
And I don't think we should ever subscribe to that.
There's actually an obligation
and a responsibility that we have,
and we can up all the way back to the tree if we want to,
about that, that there are some distinct
and, uh, I would say, um, uh, advantageous
elements agree of the outcomes
and where we bring that cultural foundation,
not an overlay foundation.
No.
Did you have a sub? It was just a sub sub.
If you don't mind when we're talking about, um,
about you were saying, um, minister evidence base and,
and also, um, monitoring Mr.
Samuels. So, so I, I'm interested, um, with respect
to sufficiently tracking the, the impact of whanau order,
um, how are we planning to, um, to monitor data collection
for that, for that means for that end rather to, um,
the impact of, there's always the impact that we've kind of,
So the, um, the, the data requirements are, um, linked
to, um, the IDI
And yes, The spine of the IDI
and being able to point to the outcomes that are achieved.
And there are various, um, stages,
'cause we're working with Stats New Zealand on that.
There are various stages where there are
data drops throughout the year.
I think there's three per year.
And then how you are actually able to prove attribution
between that and the administrative data
that we get from the bottom up from,
from the navigators right through
to the commissioning agencies and the investment committees
and the IDI data.
So it's not just just the, the hard data,
it's also administrative data.
Does that, does that answer it?
'cause there there's more detail if you like.
Yeah. And so, um, we are confident that that's going
to be showing us, um, like
Sufficiently Tracking the impact of, of wau water.
Yeah. That's part of the procurement process contract.
That is one of the shifts which,
which the aim here and thank you Greg.
The aim here was to get in front of this Yeah.
To put Wau water in front of this,
It will take some time just in terms of showing impact.
So we'll put it into the IDI,
but it is a longer game that we are playing
with Wana water in terms of able to show that. Yeah.
Amy, did you wanna say Something?
Yeah, the other thing that we'll be able to see
as well is the progression
of whanau against the whanau water outcomes.
So we'll be able to see cohorts
of progression across the kind of framework
that we are using to measure outcomes.
And that will come to us within six months of, of the new,
um, commissioning agencies. Mm-hmm.
You looking at the time, this might be the last question
we have, but Penny, we'll see how we go. Better
Make it a long one. Thank you Mr.
Chair
Here On look for fear of speaking
of whanau water in isolation.
And I respect that within VO Maori development, it tends
to kind of sit on its own.
My question to you, minister has two cons to it.
The first one is, where in vogue Maori development do we see
the kind of horizontal approach that we speak
of when we consider whanau water?
We know we have a, we, you know, you have a responsibility
for Maori housing and all these other things
that contribute to whanau water.
That's the first prong.
The second prong is how you make sure
that there is the horizontal kind of, uh, funding access
and workability from
Wau Water across the other agencies that we've heard as part
of the role of TPK.
Yeah. Uh,
Sorry, and if I may just
because the example I give is
what we spoke about at the first instance of Martini
and it was about getting that horizontal kind of,
so I'm just asking we in this vote and process moving
Forward, I think lemme just think about that carefully
because, uh, I might go off onto my own reservation,
which would be pretty, um, typical question.
Uh, let me just stand back and, and think carefully
because ultimately one of the functions of, uh, WAU order
or one of the um, uh, um, understated,
uh, um, outcomes
of wau audit is it brings together a whole range
of different coup that are funded across different agencies.
But the wau order provide all the
commission agency hasn't got their funding.
Mm. And it ends up picking up a lot of, I don don't want
to call it, um, mess.
But, um, challenges that really
are the in are reflect the inadequate delivery of services
by other agencies and au orders often loped with them, uh,
final order providers and navigators.
And many of you who have worked in this space really
understand that well.
So, uh, when we, um, engage with the likes of,
uh, is a great example, building houses
and to two tied for single moms with kids, uh, the ability
to have interdepartmental, I call them boards, well,
I don't want to get to that space,
but interdepartmental funding that just says,
you're doing a great job.
Here's some pier. Build the, um, greenfield.
Mm, it's whanau communities
and it's hard to do that when you've got existing cities
and deprivation everything.
But that's the type of thinking that I have when I forecast
where could whanau water go?
Uh, and if that's the greenfield
or the resurrected brownfield of basically
hubbing a whole range of, um, um, social
spending through the one commissioning agency
to enable wau across a variety of, um, aspects, health,
education, getting kids to school, housing,
building a new house, or repairing the
house, yada, yada, yada.
That's where I think there is one pathway, uh,
for the whanau order, 2.0 as it's described by some people,
uh, to, um, to head toward.
I'm actually all for that.
Uh, because then you get, uh, people
who are trusted providers
and navigators who are able
to facilitate outcomes across a range of,
um, appropriations.
Now what one view, I suppose is that, you know,
government gets in the way and is a big, um, expense center
and margin taker around the delivery of public services.
Uh, and I think that's a legitimate view that some whole,
if we can get a bit more closer to the action
and a very efficient, um, responsibility
or very efficient use of taxpayers money by government
to enable that locally centered whanau led solution through
providers via, via the commission agency.
Hallelujah. I all for that.
So I don't just stop at, um, the model
or the a CC model,
but I'll look across whole range of government initiatives
and say, you know, especially housing,
because that is such an important part of someone's life
to have a roof over their heads.
I say actually what we've seen with the Iwi prototypes
as an example, code Water Now,
they're not just about housing, they're actually about
savings and investment and giving people's lives and orders.
Actually, that's okay.
That's something that I think that we can buddy up with.
Or, um, in order to get quite a broader vista
of not just government targets and priorities,
but actually au targets
and priorities by way of their whanau
planes, uh, to fruition.
If we just attack it on the basis of the whanau order, um,
appropriation and one
or two government targets, I don't think we'll win the game.
And again, you have five cars down the driveway. Yeah.
If that one car is whanau order, um,
recharged Mark two.
Cool. Dave, I'll leave it with you, Chris.
No, 80 Data Jedi.
How about we just use this last small
moment here for the last question? A quick
Question.
Um, I I have to say that, uh, around this table,
I'm probably the only person
that has frontline experience in ura.
I was a CEO of two Maori organizations as part
of the URA commissioning agency over my years working in,
uh, Maori provider land.
Um, and I have to say,
your responses don't make sense to me.
Oh. And, um, if they don't make sense to me,
because you talk about data, you talk about, um,
navigation reporting up
and meeting these outcomes when we already had a
commissioning agency that did that,
and there's evidence for days to prove that.
So your responses don't make sense to me
because on the ground we worked very, very hard
in delivering Wau what outcomes for our wau.
And we did that in a very collective way across, uh,
the w commissioning agency.
And in Koto especially,
and I need to thank, um, the Honorable Unity
and the Honorable Willy Jackson for their mahi
and dedication to Whanau ura
because they were part of the drive of,
of Maori providers excelling
and delivering, uh, services, uh, you know,
delivering outcomes for Maori for our people.
So the, it just doesn't make sense to me that you
and a very credible commissioning agency
set up a new, a new agent w water commissioning agencies
who are contracting the very same providers.
Now that doesn't make sense why you end something
and get a new one,
but you're using the same Maori providers.
Can I tell you the, at the um,
conference we had last week, a lot
of them are like, what the hell?
We don't know what's happening.
We are being put under these new commissioning agencies,
but the commissioning agent,
the new commissioning agencies have no idea what to do.
They're coming to ask providers how to set up a contract.
What, what services do they wanna deliver?
They're asking providers, um, how they're gonna report.
Yet we already had a very,
we had an existing reporting, uh, process.
If there was a problem with the current, uh,
commissioning agency and what they could deliver,
and you've got these new outcome that you want to have
reported on, why didn't you just have a conversation
and say, we need to extend the reporting, uh, of outcomes
that we want delivered.
It is a waste of time and energy from our people
And from our providers.
And they are, yeah, that, so they feel like there, there's a
to be as quiet as I can there frame.
I think there's a, there there should be a ride for reply.
Sustain. So you,
okay, we'll leave there. Okay. So
I don't think there was a question.
There wasn't a question. I didn't know whether you wanted
to actually make it was,
there was a statement whether you wanna close off an
close the session. You happy
Minister Dave, did you have any comments?
Uh, did you want me to comment on the statement?
Absolutely. Look, in terms
of the outcomes about the same outcomes,
they're just being measured.
And if you want, you know, the question was raised here,
right at the beginning, it was a billion dollars
that was identified.
Ask the question, why didn't we get there?
Well, we can carry on if you like. Do
I think it's three and half?
Well, hopefully was a wonderful way
to finish task well done.
Apart from I was the CEO before you were just,
I just acknowledge
before we, uh, finish, uh,
particularly acknowledge Tasha's lived experience in running
those organizations and much will, uh,
I really appreciate the opportunity
to present on my development and the final audit portfolios.
Bit some hard questions and sometimes there's been some
pretty strong comments, uh, acknowledge Dave and team
and also the Kai Mahi, uh,
and the chair, uh, for supporting the meeting.
And scaffolding the meeting. As you know, happy
to receive W PQS and oq
Just in response.
It's, you can't think
of a better ad than the common goals, different roles.
You know, we we're a committee here to do a particular task
and minister you have a role as well as David
and your itself.
And I do believe we're,
we're all wanting a very similar goals.
It's just the pathway of actually getting them made at times
different, et cetera, et cetera.
So I also want to thank you for the engagement we've had.
I think it's been a learned experience.
We are better off for this occasion itself.
And I do thank you all for coming along
and spending a considerable amount
of time today on some very important,
hard to get a bloody question in the
hard to please will.
Dave, that was Chris. So that's gonna go.